=== Page 2 ===
April 11th 2026
The world this week
Leaders
Letters
By Invitation
Briefing
United States
The Americas
Asia
China
Middle East & Africa
Europe
Britain
International
Business
Finance & economics
Science & technology
Culture

=== Page 3 ===
Economic & financial indicators
Obituary

=== Page 4 ===
优质App推荐
英阅阅读器 - 让您轻松阅读
英语书, 高效查词、句子翻译、背单词、AI学英语、第三方图书源等一
应俱全! 点击下载

=== Page 5 ===
Duolingo - 快乐、高效学外
语, 带你玩转听说读写! 点击下载
Notability - 高效、便捷的
PDF笔记App, 随时记录你的想法! 点击下载

=== Page 6 ===
The world this week
Politics
Business
The weekly cartoon

=== Page 7 ===
The world this week
Politics
April 9th 2026
Donald Trump called a two-week truce in the Iran war. But it was soon on
shaky ground, as Iran continued to threaten shipping in the Strait of Hormuz
and launched more missiles at Gulf states, and at Saudi Arabia’s pipeline
carrying oil from the Gulf to the Red Sea for export. Iran insists that the
ceasefire agreement means Israel must stop its attacks on Hizbullah, Iran’s
proxy in Lebanon. Israel and America contend that it does not. Israel
launched its biggest attack on Lebanon yet, in which over 250 people died.
Mr Trump said US ships and aircraft would remain in the region until Iran
complied with “the real agreement”. Amid all the uncertainty, Pakistan
prepared to host peace talks in Islamabad.
A few days ahead of the ceasefire America launched a huge combat search
and rescue mission to find a crewman from an F-15 fighter jet that was
possibly shot down by an Iranian missile. The airman hid in Iranian

=== Page 8 ===
mountains before he was eventually extracted by American forces. Iran had
also launched an operation to find him. A captured American would have
handed the regime a big propaganda victory.
Mr Trump met Mark Rutte, NATO’s secretary-general, at the White House.
The president has questioned the loyalty of NATO countries in the Iran war
and mooted the possibility of leaving the alliance. Mr Rutte said their
discussion had been frank, but that most European countries had provided
support to America, even if some had failed to help.
Pete Hegseth, America’s secretary of war, fired General Randy George as
the army’s chief of staff, amid an increasingly tetchy relationship between
the army’s top brass and the Trump administration. General George had
recently tried to hold a meeting to discuss Mr Hegseth’s decision to block
the promotion of some army officers, according to reports.
Mr Trump promoted Todd Blanche to acting attorney-general after sacking
Pam Bondi from the job. The president reportedly wasn’t happy that Ms
Bondi hadn’t launched more prosecutions against his enemies and thought
she had mishandled the release of the Epstein files. Mr Blanche, who was
Ms Bondi’s deputy, is a lawyer who has defended Mr Trump in his criminal
court cases, including his hush-money trial.
Cuba released the first batch of more than 2,000 prisoners it has promised to
set free in what the communist government described as a “humanitarian”
gesture. It was the biggest such amnesty in ten years. America said it was
monitoring the situation to see if any political prisoners would be among
those released.
Venezuela has released hundreds of political prisoners since January amid
pressure from the Trump administration. In another easing of tensions
between the two countries, the United States lifted sanctions on Delcy
Rodríguez, who became Venezuela’s interim president when Nicolás
Maduro was snatched by American forces. The White House praised Ms
Rodríguez for “doing a great job”.
Kanye West was banned from entering Britain amid a furore over his past
antisemitic remarks and praise of Hitler. Known as Ye, the rap artist was

=== Page 9 ===
supposed to headline a festival in London in July, but corporate sponsors,
such as Pepsi, pulled out when his comments resurfaced in the media. The
festival has been cancelled.
Britain’s Labour government announced an adjustment to the complicated
and controversial system of student loans. But it is not the permanent change
that disgruntled graduates wanted. From September, when rates for the next
academic year are set, a cap of 6% interest will be fixed for 2026-27. The
loans are currently subject to an increase of retail price inflation plus 3%
each year. The government says the change “will protect students and
graduates…from the potential of inflation” due to the conflict in the Middle
East.
J.D. Vance, America’s vice-president, visited Hungary to show his support
for Viktor Orban, the prime minister. Mr Orban, who shares the same
worldview as Mr Vance and Mr Trump, is facing a tough re-election battle
on April 12th; his populist-right Fidesz party has consistently trailed Tisza,
its centrist rival, in the polls. Deflecting accusations that America was
meddling in Hungarian politics, Mr Vance criticised the EU for interfering in
Hungary’s relations with Russia, suggesting it was a “foreign influence”.

=== Page 10 ===
Hungary’s tense relationship with Ukraine has featured in the election.
Following the discovery of explosives near a pipeline in Serbia that carries
Russian gas to Hungary, Mr Orban called an emergency security meeting.
Russia suggested Ukraine had planted the devices, which Ukraine denied.
Mr Orban’s opponents questioned the timing of the discovery of the
explosives, and subsequent scaremongering, so close to the election.
Ukraine’s parliament began voting on a series of tax reforms that are tied to
funding from the IMF, though there is stiff opposition to some of the
changes. Meanwhile, Ukraine said Russia killed eight people in attacks on
the south-east of the country, and had targeted buses. The Russians blamed a
Ukrainian drone for killing three people in the Vladimir region, east of
Moscow.
Police killed one gunman and injured two others outside the Israeli consulate
in Istanbul. There were no Israeli diplomats inside. They left Turkey for
their own safety soon after Hamas’s terrorist attack on Israel in October
2023.
Vietnam’s parliament unanimously elected To Lam, the Communist Party’s
leader, as president and head of state, making him the most powerful leader
in the country in decades. To Lam rose to prominence by overseeing a
crackdown on government corruption. He plans soon to visit Xi Jinping in
China. Le Minh Hung, a former governor of Vietnam’s central bank, was
selected as prime minister.
In Myanmar the parliament also rubber-stamped the concentration of power
in the country’s leader by elevating Min Aung Hlaing to the position of
president. As an army general, Min Aung Hlaing led the military coup that
ousted the civilian government in 2021. China congratulated him on his
“election”.
On a rare visit to China by a senior Taiwanese politician, Cheng Li-wun,
who leads the opposition Kuomintang (KMT), visited the tomb of Sun Yat-
sen, the party’s founder, in Nanjing. The city was the centre of the Republic
of China’s government before it fled to Taiwan in 1949, after being defeated
by the communists in China’s civil war. Ms Cheng promised to “promote
reconciliation and unity”. Back home the KMT is stalling an increase in

=== Page 11 ===
defence spending that the government has asked for as China steps up its
military drills in the seas around Taiwan.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/politics

=== Page 12 ===
The world this week
Business
April 9th 2026
NASA’s Artemis II mission revived some of the optimism about space travel
that greeted the Apollo flights in the 1960s and 1970s. The crew of three
men and one woman in the spacecraft they named Integrity travelled
406,771 km (252,756 miles) from Earth, farther than the previous record for
manned space travel set by the Apollo 13 mission in 1970. As they looped
around the far side of the Moon they viewed regions on the lunar surface no
human had ever seen before, as well as a rare in-space solar eclipse.
SpaceX provided more details of its forthcoming IPO at a meeting with
bankers, according to reports, and suggested that a large portion of the
shares it offers will be made available to retail investors rather than
institutions. Elon Musk’s rocket company could seek to raise as much as
$75bn upon its stockmarket debut in June, which would make it by far the
biggest listing ever.

=== Page 13 ===
Oil prices remained volatile after the announcement of a ceasefire in the Iran
conflict; Brent crude fell from about $110 a barrel to a little over $90, but
then rose again. Saudi Aramco, meanwhile, increased the premium it
charges to customers in Asia for its main oil grade to $19.50 a barrel, which
comes on top of the Oman-Dubai benchmark price. It is a record jump in the
premium for Asia, but less than markets had expected.
ExxonMobil warned that its first-quarter profit will take a hit from the Iran
war, but mostly because of the accounting procedure it had used to hedge
prices. This was a “timing effect”, the company explained, and would result
in a profit once the transactions covered by the hedging were finalised. The
surge in oil and gas prices would have a positive impact on its earnings, it
said. Exxon estimated that its global oil and gas production would be 6%
lower in the quarter than in the previous three months, in large part because
of Iran’s attacks on its gas assets in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
American employers created 178,000 jobs in March, the most since
December 2024. The rebound came after 133,000 jobs were shed in
February. Health care and construction accounted for most of the new
workers, but federal-government employment continued to decline by a
further 18,000 positions. The number of federal jobs has dropped by
355,000, or 11.8%, since reaching a peak in October 2024.
Pershing Square Capital, an investment-management company run by Bill
Ackman, announced a complex plan to take control of Universal Music by
combining it with an investment vehicle in America. If successful the deal
would see Universal’s share listing move from Amsterdam to New York, but
Mr Ackman will need to secure the agreement of two-thirds of the music
company’s stockholders, as well as the blessing of Vincent Bolloré, who is
its largest shareholder.
Commerzbank revealed that it had held talks with UniCredit about a
takeover recently, but that the negotiations were fruitless. Commerzbank has
been fending off hostile overtures from its Italian rival for 18 months, ever
since UniCredit started amassing a stake in the German lender, which now
stands at 29%. Last month UniCredit made its €35bn ($41bn) takeover offer
formal.

=== Page 14 ===
Campbell Wilson announced that he would step down as chief executive of
Air India, 18 months before his scheduled departure. Mr Wilson was tasked
with turning the airline around when it was bought by Tata Group from the
government in 2022, but it has struggled with losses. It is also subject to
more regulatory scrutiny after one of its planes crashed in Ahmedabad last
June, killing 260 people. IndiGo, Air India’s main rival, recently appointed
Willie Walsh, a former CEO of British Airways, as its new boss.
Foxconn reported a 30% increase in revenue for the first quarter, year on
year. The contract manufacturer, which assembles many of the world’s
devices, experienced strong growth for cloud and networking products
because of “robust” demand for AI racks for data centres. The launch of the
new iPhone helped contribute to “significant” growth in its consumer-
electronics division.
OpenAI published an “Industrial Policy for the Intelligence Age”. Subtitled
“Ideas to Keep People First”, the document outlined the firm’s vision around
three broad topics, of distributing AI-driven prosperity more evenly, creating
safeguards to reduce systemic risks, and ensuring widespread access to AI so
that economic opportunity isn’t concentrated among the tech class. It also
recognises that as “AI reshapes work and production”, governments may
come to rely less on labour income and payroll taxes, and more on capital
gains and corporate taxation.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/business

=== Page 15 ===
The world this week
The weekly cartoon
April 9th 2026
Dig deeper into the subjects of this week’s cartoon:
European allies are losing hope of keeping America in NATODonald
Trump’s ceasefire shows how America has changedRecriminations over Iran
have heightened the risk of a break-up of NATO
The editorial cartoon appears weekly in The Economist. You can see last
week’s here.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/the-weekly-cartoon

=== Page 16 ===
Leaders
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s economic harm
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk of a break-up of
NATO
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for legalising assisted dying

=== Page 17 ===
Leaders | Our cover
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
There is a reason he wants an exit from Iran
April 9th 2026
NOT ALL wars have a winner. But every war has at least one loser and if—
a big if—the ceasefire marks the end of the war in Iran, the biggest loser will
be Donald Trump. The conflict has set back his chief war aims and revealed
the shallowness of his vision for a new way of wielding American power.
The peace is desperately fragile. America and Iran cannot agree on whether
it covers Lebanon, being attacked so hard by Israel that the threat to the
broader ceasefire seems intentional. They dispute how Iran should open the
Strait of Hormuz, an American precondition for talks. And their negotiating
positions are so far apart that they cannot agree even on what plan they are
to discuss in Islamabad at the weekend.

=== Page 18 ===
The best reason to think Mr Trump will not return to war is that he now
grasps he should never have started it. His abhorrent chest-beating posts
threatening to destroy Iran look like attempts to dress his climbdown in
Kevlar. He knows that renewed war would panic the markets and that having
hailed a “Golden Age” in the Middle East, the player of four-dimensional
chess would risk looking a fool.
Iran, too, has reasons to hold back. Its leaders keep being killed. Though
they care little about their citizens, including the thousands who have died in
the war, the wholesale destruction of power and transport networks would
make the country harder to govern. They also want sanctions lifted. The
regime will also fancy that time favours it at the negotiating table. America
cannot permanently keep its troops poised to attack. If war breaks out again
it will be because Iran overplays its hand.
The most likely outcome is therefore a wounded Iranian regime clinging to
power and holding out for maximal goals in talks. Iran has no navy or air
force; it has lost and used up many of its missiles and drones. To make more
of them, it will have to contend with the fact that its economy has been set
back years by over 21,000 American and Israeli strikes.
Mr Trump is calling that a great victory. It doesn’t look like one alongside
his scant progress in fulfilling the war’s three most persuasive aims: to make
the Middle East safer and more prosperous by taming Iran; to topple the
regime; and to stop Iran becoming a nuclear power once and for all.
The war has harmed regional security. Before it began, Israel had partially
dismantled Iran’s network of proxy militias. Yet Iran has now established a
new source of leverage, by attacking Gulf countries and blocking shipping
through the Strait of Hormuz. Iran is seeking to charge a toll for use of the
strait. Mr Trump has even mused about splitting the revenues. The Gulf
states and their customers can probably manage to resist such an affront to
freedom of navigation. But a tussle lies ahead.
Even after oil producers have built new pipelines to avoid the Gulf—the
work of several years—Iran will be able to strike critical infrastructure. The
Gulf countries, which market themselves as oases of calm, must ask whether

=== Page 19 ===
they can depend on America. Or should they rethink their security by doing
more themselves or even finding an accommodation with Iran?
The regime remains, despite Mr Trump’s feeble claim to have brought it
down. He may be hoping that Iranians soon rise up against their oppressors
so that he can claim the credit. That is possible, but it looks less likely now
than before the war, when the regime was more unpopular than at any time
in its 47-year history. With Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ailing, it faced a
perilous transition to a new generation. The war has brought about that
transition, anointing Ali’s son, Mojtaba. Unlike Ali, he is a figurehead.
Control lies with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and its rivalrous
factions—all of them belligerent nationalists.
And the war may have aggravated the nuclear threat. America and Israel did
further damage to Iran’s infrastructure, but 400kg or so of highly enriched
uranium—enough to make ten bombs—is still buried at nuclear sites. Mr
Trump is insisting that Iran surrender this “nuclear dust”. Iran wants
sanctions relief, but the incentive to deter future attacks by using it to make a
bomb has increased, potentially leading to regional nuclear proliferation.
That would be a dire outcome, but to stop it Mr Trump and future presidents
may have to strike every few years. On the evidence of this war, that will be
hard to sustain.
Where does this leave the architects of this conflict? Never has Israel
wielded such military power as it does today. But the war showed the limits
to what this can achieve and how its appetite for pre-emptive attack is
leading to fear and loathing in the region. For many Israelis, to fight as
America’s equal stirred great national pride. Yet even as Israel has earned
the praise of Republican politicians, 60% of Americans now look
unfavourably on it, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. That
leaves Israel weaker.
America under Mr Trump has even more to reflect on. The country used to
derive its power by marrying military strength with moral authority. But
when this president threatens to wipe out the Iranian civilisation—a
genocide by any other name—he treats morality as if it were a source of
weakness.

=== Page 20 ===
Some in the Trump administration behave as if America is tied down by
things like international law and the Geneva conventions. Liberated from
those constraints it will be more powerful. The war has shown that “might is
right” is not just a desecration of decades of foreign policy, but a fallacy.
Although America’s military superiority was on full display in Iran—
integrating artificial intelligence into operations, rescuing downed pilots,
achieving supremacy at low cost—it also revealed deep problems.
The war has shown that the value of America’s might is easy to
overestimate. Its factories cannot resupply its armed forces fast enough,
whereas Iran fought an asymmetric war with limited weapons. Too much
testosterone leads to wretched judgments that confuse lethality with
winning. Overwhelming firepower without a strategy saps American
strength.
Iran has a wicked regime, but a just war depends on a sober judgment that
violence is a necessary last resort. Instead Mr Trump treated Iran as a vanity
project, in which America’s strength absolved him of the responsibility for
thinking through the consequences of choosing to attack. Might alone is not
right. Sometimes it fails even to bring victory. ■
For subscribers only: to see how we design each week’s cover, sign up to our
weekly Cover Story newsletter.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/donald-trump-is-the-wars-biggest-
loser

=== Page 21 ===
Leaders | The hangover
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s
economic harm
Even if the Strait of Hormuz reopens, expect lasting change to energy
markets
April 9th 2026
THROUGHOUT THE war in Iran most investors have bet that an economic
catastrophe would not take place. Oil and gas prices would need to rise to
the stratosphere to destroy demand for the fuel that flows through the Strait
of Hormuz. That would cause recession and high inflation. So commodities
prices rose to painful, rather than disastrous, levels. The planned reopening
of the strait seems to have justified the optimism. As we published this,
stocks and bonds alike had rallied. The S&P 500 index of stocks sat only
about 3% beneath its all-time high, reached in late January.

=== Page 22 ===
If the ceasefire fails the rally would be reversed and then some, because
investors would have to price in a war that is resistant to peacemaking. If it
holds, recession will be avoided, but commodities markets will still feel the
effects of the war for months to come. Gulf countries have cut their output of
crude by 10m barrels per day, or 10% of global supply. It will take time to
restart infrastructure and get it going full pelt, and to move tankers to the
right places. Insuring cargoes could be pricey, and Iran may try to impose
new tolls, creating uncertainty even if it fails. There is likely to be a lasting
risk premium in oil prices, reflecting the chance of renewed fighting.
This lasting disruption explains why, if futures prices are to be believed, the
price of a barrel of Brent crude will end the year at around $75, about a
quarter higher than was expected at the start of 2026. Similar hangovers will
be felt in other commodities markets. Gas infrastructure is even harder to get
going than oil wells. Qatar’s Ras Laffan export facility lost 17% of its
capacity in a drone attack and will take years to repair. A shortage of
fertiliser, for which the Gulf is also a crucial supplier, has already disrupted
the planting season in the northern hemisphere and parts of Africa. That will
reduce the supply of food and worsen global hunger. Supply chains for
petrochemicals, helium and aluminium will also take time to recover.

=== Page 23 ===
The combined economic effect will be to dent global growth and to raise
inflation materially. Central banks will keep interest rates modestly higher
than they might have been; returns for investors will be lower. Businesses
will worry even more about the security of supply chains. They have faced
one shock after another, including covid-19, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and American tariffs. Nobody can now deny the necessity of hedging against
political risk, pandemics and wars. But the need to consider such factors
deters investment and acts as a creeping tax on global economic activity.
All of which sits uneasily with buoyant financial markets. True, the
resilience of the “Teflon economy” shows the adaptive power of markets in
the face of disruption—and the discipline that the threat of catastrophe
exerts on the likes of Donald Trump. Yet disasters cannot always be dodged
and the list of tail risks is long. It includes a Chinese invasion of Taiwan and
an artificial-intelligence crisis.
With energy, there is at least a silver lining to a supply-chain rethink. It
never made sense for global prosperity to depend so much on a single
waterway in the Gulf. Slowing climate change requires burning less fossil
fuel. The need to diversify away from the Middle East will encourage more
renewables capacity and a hunt for new sources of natural gas. The fracking
revolution of the 2010s, from which America has benefited hugely, is an
example of adaptation. The technology had its roots in the 1970s oil shocks,
which also encouraged investment in nuclear power in France and the
exploitation of North Sea oil by Britain and Norway.
The advantages of having a secure and plentiful energy supply are once
again being made plain. The best case for the world is that the economy will
dodge a 1970s-style slump—while policymakers learn 1970s-style lessons.
■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/a-ceasefire-will-not-prevent-the-
iran-wars-economic-harm

=== Page 24 ===
Leaders | The transatlantic divorce
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk
of a break-up of NATO
Europe must prepare to defend itself
April 9th 2026
RELATIONSHIPS RARELY collapse overnight; they curdle. Bit by bit,
resentments mount. Trust ebbs. Things are said that are hard to forget. Each
partner builds a story in which the other is the problem. That is how war in
Iran has pushed NATO closer than ever to a point of no return.
To President Donald Trump, America’s European allies put themselves in
the wrong at the start of the war by being slow—and in some cases simply
refusing—to allow American forces to use their own airbases, or to fly
through allied airspace, for strikes on Iran. “You’ll have to start learning how
to fight for yourself, the USA won’t be there to help you anymore, just like
you weren’t there for us,” posted Mr Trump on March 31st.

=== Page 25 ===
Europe, naturally, has its own version of events. Many of its governments,
rightly, saw the Iran campaign as rash and dangerously vague. They were
reflecting the views of their voters, who fear being entangled in a war on
which they were not consulted and of which they disapprove. Even so,
countries like Germany and (after a bit of dithering) Britain did allow
America use of its bases and their airspace.
Mr Trump has abused his allies before. Denmark, the most loyal of NATO
members, has been threatened with the seizure of Greenland; European
governments are accused of democratic backsliding. Tariffs have added to
the pain. Being loyal gets you nowhere. But the recriminations over Iran are
more rancorous than ever. That is partly because Mr Trump genuinely feels
let down, but Europeans suspect that it may also be because he wants
scapegoats for the war’s disappointments.
Is this a relationship that can be fixed? Atlanticists still hope so; Mark Rutte,
secretary-general of NATO, visited Mr Trump in Washington on April 8th
hoping to persuade him that to stay in NATO is in America’s own interests.
He didn’t appear to have much success, so even the most committed
Atlanticists must now plan for the worst.
The terrible truth is that, threatening Europe, national security should no
longer be based on the assumption America will be “there to help”. NATO’s
Article 5, which defines an attack on one as an attack on all, is not dead. But
its deterrent effect, based adversaries’ belief that the allies will stick
together, is weaker than at any point in the alliance’s 77-year history,
including crises such as Vietnam and the war in Iraq. Nor can Europe
comfort itself that Mr Trump’s irritation will blow over. Marco Rubio, his
secretary of state, marked a new low by also questioning the value of
membership. And the next president could well agree.
One reason is that Mr Trump is right to say NATO’s European members do
not spend enough on their own defence. For decades they have relied on
America while contributing less than promised. The 2014 target that
committed NATO members to spend 2% of GDP on defence was largely
ignored until Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022. Under Trumpian pressure,
governments talk of 4% or even 5%. But the gap between promise and

=== Page 26 ===
reality remains vast. Among the big European countries, only Germany and
Poland are due to meet this goal.
If the transatlantic marriage dissolves, Europeans will have to be ready to
defend themselves. As the prospect of divorce looms larger, the timeline for
self-sufficiency tightens. Europe must now ensure sustained defence
spending at levels closer to those higher targets. New capabilities must be
built, especially in air defence, logistics and munitions, where Europe relies
on America. Forces and arms manufacturing need to be integrated, not
duplicated inefficiently.
Ukraine should be central to Europe’s new security architecture. After four
years of holding off Vladimir Putin, it now fields the continent’s largest and
most battle-hardened army by far (after Russia’s), with deep experience in
high-intensity warfare and the manufacture and use of drones. Rather than
viewing Ukraine solely as a recipient of aid, Europe should aim to integrate
its armed forces into joint planning, procurement and command structures.
They should prepare to make Ukraine part of what may become a Europe-
only version of NATO. Its accession to the European Union should be
accelerated, too. Sadly, all this is a distant prospect.
A reconciliation between Europe and America may still be possible. But the
past six weeks gives scant ground for hope. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/recriminations-over-iran-have-
heightened-the-risk-of-a-break-up-of-nato

=== Page 27 ===
Leaders | All downhill from here
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
But rekindled Space Age enthusiasm will need new foundations if it is to
endure
April 9th 2026
On christmas day 1968, a boy called Michael Collins junior asked his father
who was driving Apollo 8, then bringing home the first three men to have
orbited the Moon. Collins senior, who oversaw communications with the
spacecraft, passed his son’s question on to Bill Anders, one of the crew.
There was a pause. Then Anders replied: “I think Isaac Newton is doing
most of the driving right now.” From when it had left lunar orbit until its
planned splashdown on December 27th, the spacecraft’s path was almost
entirely set, like that of a falling rock, by the law of universal gravitation.
Sir Isaac does a lot of this sort of work for spacecraft. After the fiery leap of
lift-off they spend most of their time coasting. Integrity, the capsule that

=== Page 28 ===
houses the crew of NASA’s Artemis II mission, has used its main engine
only twice, once to change its orbit around Earth, once to leave it. The crew
of Apollo 8 depended on a burst from their main engine to get into lunar
orbit without hitting the surface (“Longest four minutes I ever spent,” said
Jim Lovell, the pilot). Integrity’s crew just cruised on by, their elegant
figure-of-eight trajectory taking them past the Moon and farther from Earth
than any previous astronauts before beginning the long fall back.
This is not to say the four astronauts—three American, one Canadian—have
not been busy, particularly during their passage over the parts of the Moon
that cannot be seen from Earth. To terrestrial Moon-watchers Mare Orientale
is a hard-to-spot smudge right at the edge of the Moon. To the astronauts
passing almost directly above it, it was a dark bullseye set among concentric
mountain ranges, ripples of rock left by the shock unleashed when a sizeable
asteroid smacked into the Moon less than 4bn years ago. The “targeting
plan” put together to guide the astronauts’ observations helpfully notes that
its diameter is roughly the distance between Johnson Space Centre in
Houston, Texas, where they trained, and Kennedy Space Centre in Florida,
from which they blasted off.
Other features to which the plan drew the crew’s attention, such as Pierazzo,
a far-side crater about 9km across, have previously been appreciated only by
cognoscenti. It was named after Elisabetta Pierazzo, who specialised in the
study of impact craters; remote measurements of its fresh and intriguing
features have been pored over by her colleagues and successors. It seems
unlikely that the astronauts’ brief inspection will have added much. “It’s a
spectacular crater and it’s nice to remember Betty,” says a scientist. “But I
don’t expect any new science results from Artemis II.”
Remembrance also informed the most moving of the observations, those of a
fresh and previously unrecorded crater on the edge of the Moon’s far side.
The crew is recommending it be officially named Carroll, after Carroll
Taylor Wiseman, the late wife of the mission commander, Reid Wiseman.
How tears behave in the absence of gravity is not thought to be part of the
crew’s research agenda, but the message by which they told the world of
their choice made it clear they had found out.

=== Page 29 ===
That the mission has produced more by way of emotion than by way of
science—or, thinking of Lovell’s four minutes, jeopardy—is not a criticism.
Integrity’s flight along a path very like that taken by the uncrewed Artemis I
capsule in 2022 was never likely to provide scientific surprises, and any
major technical ones would have been very unwelcome. And so the crew’s
experience has come to the fore. Even if, at times, their expressions of awe,
humility and cosmic connection have felt a touch too scripted, they have
made possible not new discovery, but rediscovery: a reminder to millions
back on Earth that such things can still move them and inspire them.
No picture of Earth and the Moon today can supersede Anders’s picture of
“Earthrise”; it has had half a century to become an icon. But the importance
of “Earthrise” has never been just what the camera saw. It was the presence
of somebody behind the camera, someone in a position to see such a thing.
For most people alive today there has never been such a presence. The
feelings Artemis II evokes by restoring it are no less real to those people for
having been felt before.
Unless re-entry sees Integrity fail tragically to live up to its name, this
emotional affirmation will endure for some time. The role that Elon Musk
and SpaceX are meant to play in the next Artemis mission may sour the
vibes—many idealists stirred by images of Earth as a common home revile
the politics of division he fosters. But Artemis IV’s promise of a lunar
landing soon thereafter should restore the mood.
What, though, of the steady stream of missions planned for after that—those
intended to build and provision a Moon base? They will, by their nature, feel
increasingly routine. The rapture that greeted Apollo 8’s first journey to the
Moon, and later the first landing, was soon eclipsed by Vietnam, oil crises,
Watergate and more. To maintain it, and the support it brings, for a decade or
more this time will require new discoveries, or arguments, or dreams—not
just remixes of those that came before. Spaceships can coast. Space
programmes cannot. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.

=== Page 30 ===
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/07/artemis-ii-has-offered-earth-
inspiration

=== Page 31 ===
Leaders | Assisted dying
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for
legalising assisted dying
He should stop dawdling
April 9th 2026
This NEWSpaper believes people should have the right to choose the
manner of their own death. That idea is gaining ground around the world;
some 30 jurisdictions have legalised it to date. Yet in England and Wales the
latest attempt to pass legislation, and the one that has come closest to
succeeding, is now certain to fail. This is a tragedy.
The bill, introduced by Kim Leadbeater, a Labour backbencher, has enough
support to become law. It was passed in the House of Commons in June.
Most Britons, including the prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, have
consistently supported the principle of assisted dying. The bill’s imminent
failure is due to a handful of unelected peers in the House of Lords, who

=== Page 32 ===
have made sure it will run out of time by submitting an unreasonable
number of amendments. But the root cause is an absence of leadership by Sir
Keir. In an attempt to avoid making the issue a partisan one, he relegated it
to a private-member’s bill; these are not introduced by government ministers
and are a weak legislative instrument. This was a misjudgment which he
must now put right.
Delays in Parliament might be more understandable if Britain were a
newcomer to this debate. But it is not. The Lords first formally debated an
assisted-dying bill in 1936, years before any other country. An effort to
legalise it has been made almost every decade since the 1960s; Ms
Leadbeater is the fifth parliamentarian to propose a bill of this kind since
2003. Yet whereas healthy debates in other countries led to legislation,
British politicians continue to dawdle.
Opponents of the Leadbeater bill raised concerns that are now well-worn:
the risk of coercion; whether the poor state of palliative care and the health
service deny people a proper choice; and the fear that the bill would be a
“slippery slope” to broader eligibility. These worries do not stand up to
scrutiny.
Coercion? The bill restricts access to assisted dying to people who have at
most six months to live and who have made sustained requests to two
doctors. The idea that an evil relative might use this process to kill someone
who will soon be dead is far-fetched. It would be good if palliative care
improved, and it would be wise to invest in it while legalising assisted
dying, as happened in New Zealand. But inadequate care is not a reason to
oblige those who truly wish to die, and who meet all the criteria, to suffer in
the meantime. Least convincing of all is the slippery-slope objection. It
implies that Britain’s Parliament could carelessly allow a more liberal
regime to emerge. If the past century shows anything it is that Parliament
will do nothing of the sort.
The most compelling argument against this bill is that it is too narrow. As
extra layers of scrutiny have been added, eligibility criteria have arguably
become tighter than in any such bill passed elsewhere. The risk is not that it
would be too easy to get an assisted death but that vanishingly few people
would qualify.

=== Page 33 ===
Still, a narrow bill is better than none; and more delay would be intolerable.
Rather than let another backbencher champion it, Sir Keir should offer his
wholehearted support and ensure it gets enough parliamentary time. To do
that, the government should itself introduce the same bill later this year and
let MPs vote according to their conscience. This is the path David Cameron
took in 2013 with a bill to legalise same-sex marriage; it is the one Sir Keir
should take now. Alas, this is unlikely: putting the weight of the government
behind assisted dying would upset some in Sir Keir’s own party and cabinet.
But if he cannot take the heat over one of the issues he strongly believes in,
what is the point of being in the kitchen?■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/sir-keir-starmer-is-britains-best-
hope-for-legalising-assisted-dying

=== Page 34 ===
Letters
Is Mexico’s economy broken?

=== Page 35 ===
Letters | A selection of correspondence
Is Mexico’s economy broken?
Also this week, costs of the Iran war, sex workers, types of tourists,
boredom at work, fizzy water
April 9th 2026
Letters are welcome via email to letters@economist.comFind out
more about how we process your letter
You were right to focus on weak growth and entrenched informality in the
labour market as factors behind “Mexico’s broken economy” (“Becalmed”,
March 28th). These remain central constraints on the economy and help
explain the country’s underperformance over time.
Concurrently, over roughly the past decade Mexico has combined falling
poverty with rising real wages and a noticeable reduction in informal labour.
The minimum wage is part of that story. During successive governments

=== Page 36 ===
under the Morena party the minimum wage has risen sharply, now sitting
high relative to the median wage. That has lifted incomes at the bottom and
appears to have influenced pay even beyond the formal sector.
Here the narrative is less clear. You noted that a higher minimum wage could
put a brake on formal labour. But these trends have evolved. Rather than
rising, informality has edged down, suggesting a more complex set of
dynamics at work. Several forces are moving at once. Changes in labour
regulation, some tightening of enforcement and the expansion of social
programmes may all have shifted incentives at the margin. None of these on
their own explains the outcome. Taken together, they begin to.
The question is how far this can go. With the minimum wage now elevated
by OECD standards, the space for further increases without side-effects is
probably narrower.
Will WisemanPractice manager for social policy, Latin AmericaWorld
BankWashington, DC
You hit on a fundamental truth that the current administration in Mexico
seems to overlook: the power of incentives. The government’s approach is
like trying to squeeze more juice out of the same handful of lemons rather
than planting more trees. By constantly raising mandated salaries and
increasing the burden on existing taxpayers, they are inadvertently making
“formality” a luxury many cannot afford.
In simple terms, we have created a system where it is expensive to follow
the rules and free to ignore them. For a small business owner or an
entrepreneur, the maths is devastatingly simple. Why would someone choose
to become “formal”—paying taxes, social security and meeting high-wage
mandates—when they can stay “informal” and keep that overhead as profit?
When the cost of being legal rises, the incentive to stay in the shadows
grows.
If the government truly wants to unleash the private sector, the policy should
not be about extraction, but attraction. We must make it cheaper and easier
to be formal than it is to be informal.

=== Page 37 ===
PABLO EMILIO MUÑOZ Ciudad Juárez, Mexico
The Mexican government’s formal response to the article can be found at
www.economist.com/mexicoletter
“After shock” (March 14th) catalogued the constraints facing America, the
world’s most powerful oil consumer, as it tried to cool the oil price amid the
Iran conflict. Permit me to describe the view from a rather different position.
Mauritius imports all of its fuel. It holds no strategic petroleum reserve. It
has no pipeline alternatives, no bilateral waiver from Washington, and no
seat at the International Energy Agency. Since the closure of the Strait of
Hormuz in early March, pump prices have risen sharply and freight costs on
Indian Ocean routes have roughly tripled. The government has no
meaningful policy lever beyond absorbing the shock or passing it to
consumers who can least afford it.
The energy-security debate triggered by the war has been framed almost
entirely around the options available to major importers, diversification,
reserve releases and accelerated renewables build-out. These are legitimate
responses for economies with the institutional capacity and fiscal space to
pursue them. For small island states, they describe a future that is
structurally inaccessible in the near term.
Energy security is increasingly determined by the ability to pay for it. The
war has made that asymmetry visible. It has not made it a policy priority.
Dr Zaheer AllamVacoas-Phoenix, Mauritius
I have been managing a high-volume brothel in Europe since 2016, and I am
also a researcher focusing on sex work as a form of labour. I read your
column on the economics of the industry with interest (Free Exchange,
March 21st). One point that stood out in the article is how difficult sex work
is to study. What is often missing in research is how this looks from the
other side. Sex workers are used to valuing their time highly. When a
researcher approaches them, often without real experience in the industry,
and asks detailed questions about income it creates a barrier. Income is very
private information, especially when a large part of it is in cash.

=== Page 38 ===
Because of this, a lot of research focuses on the most accessible groups,
which are often at the lower end of the income range. A large group of
higher-earning workers is mostly missing from the data, because they are
difficult to reach and have little reason to take part.
The economic framing of much of the research is also too narrow. Sex work
is not always just money for sex. It can also involve housing, services,
goods, or access to opportunities. This makes the economic reality more
complex than it may seem. You only touched on legal frameworks and new
technologies, but these areas have their own dynamics that shape how the
market works.
Catherine De NoireAmsterdam
Your taxonomy of modern travellers (“Wanderlust and lost”, March 21st)
has a distinguished precursor. Around 1860 Hippolyte Taine, a French
historian and philosopher, divided tourists into six types. These were: people
obsessed by the number of miles they covered; devotees of the details given
in guidebooks; group travellers wary of foreign food; gastronomic pilgrims
with the sole purpose of eating; antique hunters; and those who “see the
Pyrenees” from a hotel chair. Were he writing today, Taine might have added

=== Page 39 ===
a seventh type: the algorithmic tourist, dutifully shepherded by apps into the
same “hidden gems” as everyone else.
Astonishingly, the species has changed little. Travellers then mostly had to
endure bad inns and worse roads. As your article recounted, today’s tourists
must also reckon with visa bans, closed airspace and wars.ZUBIN
AIBARABülach, Switzerland
The real risk of getting rid of grunt work (Bartleby, March 14th) is the loss
of the cognitive “lulls” that drudgery once provided. As Sandi Mann, an
occupational psychologist, has noted, boredom is often the precursor to
divergent thinking. If AI eliminates the natural toil of legacy processes, we
may have to design deliberate periods of low-stimulation downtime into our
workflows. This would ensure that the next generation has the mental space
to be truly innovative, rather than just efficiently supervised.
Peter BalchiusStäfa, Switzerland
In his praise of grunt work, Bartleby argues that we should be wary of an
over reliance on AI to eliminate tedious work. There is, however, an
important difference between work that builds skill and work that simply
drains energy. Some tedious tasks may teach patience or train us in attention
to detail, but much office drudgery consists of unnecessary busywork: fixing
formats, hunting down files and repeating mechanical steps that software
easily handles. In that context, AI is not replacing meaningful labour so
much as removing needless obstacles. The real question is what do we do
with the gains? More output is one answer; fewer working hours may be the
better one.
Isaac ShamieSan Francisco
It is true that mind-numbing tasks can unlock creativity and satisfaction.
This explains why many people in management or professional services
were remarkably happier working from home during the pandemic. Sitting
through endless PowerPoint meetings, where colleagues toss around
concepts to hit personal airtime targets, achieving nothing beyond a vague
sense of “alignment”, is deeply frustrating to the sane mind. Interspersing
these torturous “intellectual” exercises with washing the dishes or making

=== Page 40 ===
the bed offered a necessary respite. These simple chores provided what
modern office life rarely does: an actual problem solved to completion, a
genuine sense of agency, and the mental space for an occasional eureka
moment.
Elmar GansRio de Janeiro
I enjoyed your World In a Dish column on sparkling water (March 21st).
You featured Topo Chico, which is excellent and has the angriest bubbles on
the market. But I find it inexplicable that you neglected to mention Vichy
Catalan. Silky, elegant, a touch of salinity, it is without question the best
sparkling water on earth. I will die on this hill.
Dr Julio FriedmannCarbon DirectLivermore, California
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//letters/2026/04/09/is-mexicos-economy-broken

=== Page 41 ===
By Invitation
A plan for Europe’s tech fightback

=== Page 42 ===
By Invitation | The other special relationship
A plan for Europe’s tech fightback
Britain and the EU can avoid being left in the dust if they work together,
argues Sir Nick Clegg
April 9th 2026
THE RUPTURE in the relationship between America and Europe has
highlighted Britain’s perilous position: out of the EU, yet no longer able to
rely on the “special relationship” to protect its interests. Britain is further
adrift geopolitically than it has been for a century or more. One way or
another, it must re-establish a stronger footing, and exercise greater
leadership, in Europe.
Despite cornering themselves with needlessly rigid commitments not to
reconsider single-market membership and ruling out joining the customs
union, Britain’s prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer have at least
started to make the case for a broader EU rapprochement ahead of a summit

=== Page 43 ===
in Brussels this summer. Yet so far the government has been strangely silent
on one area where greater integration across the English Channel is an
obvious win-win: technology.
Europe has vast market potential, with a nearly-$4trn tech sector—and
considerably more headroom if the EU’s capital-markets union and digital
single market are fully realised. Britain has leading venture-capital (VC) and
startup scenes. It has produced 200 unicorns (private firms worth over
$1bn), funds more startups than Germany and France combined and boasts
the world’s best-funded fintech hub. The opportunity is clear for Europe’s
tech sectors, in and outside the EU, to become the sum of their parts.
As American and Chinese technology becomes more deeply embedded,
there is much talk in Europe’s capitals about the importance of tech
sovereignty. But the truth is no European country, including Britain, is big
enough to stand on its own feet across the full range of AI-related
technologies. The tech supremacy of America and China is in large part a
function of their hemispheric scale. European nations will need to learn to
act at hemispheric scale themselves if they want to compete.
There are signs that Europe’s tech scene is stirring. European VC investment
has quadrupled in a decade, comfortably exceeding China’s. For the first
time, tech workers are just as likely to move from America to Europe as the
other way round.
To capitalise on this opportunity—and emerge stronger from the
transatlantic shock exacerbated by the Iran war—Europe needs to learn to
become a market that can innovate at scale. This should not be confined to
the EU, but a broader “Eurovision” concept of Europe (sans Australia
perhaps). Ukraine is already a world leader in AI defence innovation;
Norway is well placed to lead in low-cost, sustainable data-centre capacity.
Along with Britain, they should be included in an overarching approach to
boost Europe’s performance in bits as much as economic integration in
previous decades focused on atoms.
There are some early steps the EU and Britain can take. Some are modest,
most technocratic. But together they could help spark a continental tech
renaissance.

=== Page 44 ===
First, they should bring together efforts to develop competitive AI
capabilities. The European High-Performance Computing project is about to
fund five AI gigafactories, massive facilities for training and operating
frontier models. British companies should bid in conjunction with peers
from the EU. Britain could also use the upcoming review of the EU-UK
Trade and Co-operation Agreement to negotiate reciprocal access for
researchers and businesses to new supercomputers.
Second, Britain should join the European Investment Fund’s tech-scale-up
fund-of-funds, which provides late-stage growth capital. This would increase
the finance and expertise available to the most promising companies. British
firms could tap a source which has already helped almost a dozen unicorns.
Third, Britain’s researchers should become full members of Horizon Europe,
the EU’s research-and-innovation programme. Rejoining as “associated”
members in 2024 has already been a boon for them. Full membership would
give them access to the European Innovation Council’s equity fund for
startups.
Fourth, Britain should join the EU in embracing the bloc’s “28th regime”.
Anyone doing business in the EU faces 27 overlapping compliance systems;
under the 28th regime, they could register once then operate freely across
the bloc—much as Delaware incorporation allows in America. British
participation is feasible with commitment from both sides.
Last, it should be made easier for talent to start and grow firms in Europe by
lifting visa restrictions and granting special status for tech entrepreneurs
across greater Europe, including Iceland, Norway and Ukraine as well as
Britain. The ecosystem would be more vibrant if Europe embraced the
proposal from Oliver Coste and Yann Coatanlem, two French entrepreneurs,
to lift labour-market rules for the top 10% of earners, unlocking the febrile
talent-swapping that makes Silicon Valley so dynamic without sacrificing
employment rights for the vast majority of workers in tech.
Britain and the EU can take these steps now. Clearly their effects would be
amplified if Britain were to take the natural—and widely popular—step of
reintegrating more fully into the EU. Tough choices lie ahead for the EU too:
for example, ditching or at least significantly redrafting recent AI legislation

=== Page 45 ===
which, if enacted, would discourage AI firms from training models in
Europe just as the EU is trying to build the infrastructure for them to do so.
Britain’s temporary estrangement from its continental hinterland masks the
true strength of Europe’s position. Together, the EU and Britain enjoy a vast
reserve of ideas, capital and innovation. Europe is no musty backwater: it
has the talent, resources and incentive to lead. It should start to think, and
act, like it. ■
Sir Nick Clegg is a general partner at Hiro Capital. He was Britain’s deputy
prime minister from 2010 to 2015 and vice-president, then president, of
global affairs at Meta from 2018 to 2025.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//by-invitation/2026/04/09/a-plan-for-europes-tech-
fightback

=== Page 46 ===
Briefing
America’s war on Iran has changed the Middle East—for the worse
The war was steadily spiralling in scope and destruction

=== Page 47 ===
Briefing | With a whimper
America’s war on Iran has changed the Middle
East—for the worse
This week’s ceasefire leaves the region less secure than when the war
began
April 9th 2026
IT WAS A muddled halt to a muddled war. Donald Trump first threatened to
intensify America’s bombing so much that it would destroy Iran’s “whole
civilisation”. Then, less than two hours before this blitz was supposed to
start, he announced that America, Israel and Iran would suspend hostilities
for two weeks and that Iran would allow commercial shipping to resume
through the Strait of Hormuz. Pakistan’s prime minister, Shahbaz Sharif,
who had helped mediate the ceasefire, declared on social media that it was
“EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY”.

=== Page 48 ===
Yet Israel, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
(UAE) all reported subsequent Iranian drone and missile attacks, the truce
notwithstanding. Iran decried an air strike on an oil refinery. Israel
intensified its bombing of Lebanon, which it said was not included in the
ceasefire. Iran (and Mr Sharif) insisted that it was. Ships in the Gulf received
an alert from Iranian forces, stating that any vessel that tried to transit the
strait without Iran’s permission would be destroyed. America and Iran gave
wildly different accounts of the template for negotiations on a lasting end to
the war, which are supposed to begin in Pakistan on April 11th. Pete
Hegseth, America’s “secretary of war” declared the outcome a “historic and
overwhelming victory”. Iran claimed much the same.
It is too early to know whether the ceasefire will take hold properly, let alone
whether the talks in Pakistan will succeed. That makes it hard to judge
where the war has left the two sides. If the negotiations lead to a deal and
Iran agrees to stop threatening its neighbours in exchange for relief from
American sanctions, both will arguably benefit. If the talks fail and the war
resumes, both will be worse off.
For the moment, at least, it is hard to see any winners. The disruption to the
global economy has been vast and will continue for some time yet. Iran has
suffered severe damage not just to military facilities, but also to civilian and

=== Page 49 ===
commercial infrastructure. The Gulf states have seen revenues lost, energy
facilities damaged and their reputation for safety and stability punctured.
Israel’s popularity in America and beyond has taken another knock. America
has run down its stock of munitions and stretched its armed forces.
Meanwhile, none of the goals that Mr Trump and Israel’s prime minister,
Binyamin Netanyahu, had set for the war appear to have been met. Iran’s
regime has lost much of its military might and many of its senior leaders. Its
acceptance of the ceasefire may be a sign that pragmatists are in the
ascendant. But the Islamic Republic remains in place, retains a stockpile of
enriched uranium and still has the capacity to fire drones and missiles
around the region. Worst of all, it has demonstrated for the first time the
potency of a long-dreaded weapon, its power to close the strait, which
America has no means to counter. The region and the world will be paying a
price for the conflict for years to come.
Israelis overwhelmingly supported the war when it started, seeing Iran as an
existential threat. Now many question whether it was worth it. Despite tens
of thousands of Israeli and American strikes, Iran is still able to launch
dozens of missiles and drones at Israel and the Gulf countries every day.
Israel’s assessment early in the war that it had “neutralised” over three-
quarters of Iran’s missile-launchers looks like an exaggeration. Half is a
more plausible guess; even that includes devices that can be restored to
working order fairly easily.
The survival of the regime and its retention of its enriched uranium are
further disappointments. Worse still for Mr Netanyahu, Mr Trump is about
to start negotiating with Iran’s leaders directly. Israel was aware that talks on
the ceasefire were under way but was not party to them. The Israeli air force
was preparing to send its warplanes to attack Iran’s power grid when Mr
Trump called Mr Netanyahu to tell him to stand them down.
On an immediate tactical and military level Israel can point to considerable
achievements. Iran has lost much of its (admittedly puny) air force and its
navy. Its air-defence network is in ruins. Considerable damage has been
done to its arms industry. Israel did not lose a single warplane during the
thousands of sorties it carried out over Iran. At home, its missile-defence
systems intercepted the vast majority of the more than 600 missiles fired at

=== Page 50 ===
Israel by Iran. Only about 20 Israelis were killed, far fewer than predicted in
most military planning for a war on such a scale.
From Mr Netanyahu’s perspective, the war represented a strategic win in a
critical respect: Israel and America co-operated to an unprecedented degree.
The two countries launched a war together against a shared enemy; their
planners co-ordinated targets; and American and Israeli pilots flew on joint
missions.
Yet the manner in which the ceasefire came about, brokered by Pakistan
between America and Iran, with Israel shut out, made clear the nature of the
relationship: that of superpower and client-state. That may be reinforced in
the weeks to come. Israel will not be part of the negotiations in which
America and Iran try to thrash out some sort of permanent agreement.
Israel’s future security will be at the mercy of Mr Trump’s whims.
Worse still for Mr Netanyahu, he could yet be transformed from partner to
scapegoat. He helped convince Mr Trump to launch the war. On April 7th
the New York Times reported that many senior American officials, including
the vice-president, the secretary of state and the head of the CIA, America’s
spy agency, had expressed reservations about Mr Netanyahu’s plans before
the war began. Such leaks, as the war may be ending, could be a sign that
many in Mr Trump’s administration want to distance themselves from
Israel’s leader. They are acutely aware that Israel has become deeply
unpopular among American voters. A survey conducted in late March by
Pew, a research centre, found that 60% of Americans have an unfavourable
view of Israel, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. Mr Trump
personally still seems closely aligned with the prime minister, but their
partnership could be tested.
In a terse early morning statement, Mr Netanyahu said that Israel “supports
President Trump’s decision to suspend strikes against Iran for two weeks”.
He made a point of emphasising that it was, for Israel, merely a pause in the
hostilities. He also stressed that the ceasefire does not include Lebanon,
where Israel has been fighting Hizbullah, a militia backed by Iran which
began launching missiles at Israel on the third day of the war. Instead of
striking Iran, the Israeli air force attacked around 100 targets in Lebanon on

=== Page 51 ===
the afternoon after the ceasefire. More than 1,000 people were killed and
injured; hospitals were overwhelmed and ran short of blood.
Iran has warned that if Israel continues to strike Hizbullah, it will resume its
attacks on Israel. Mr Trump may have to rule on this soon. If he forces Israel
to suspend its campaign in Lebanon, it could signal the beginnings of a rift.
Mr Netanyahu would be eager to be the spoiler of the ceasefire but above all
he is anxious to avoid any open discord with the president, who has spoken
of arriving in Israel in two weeks as guest of honour on its independence
day. An election must be held in the next six months, and the prime
minister’s friendship with the president is a big electoral asset in Israel, one
of the few countries where Mr Trump is popular.
In order to win the election, which is expected to be held in October, Mr
Netanyahu will want to convince Israelis both that he and Mr Trump are still
partners and that Israel has won its wars in Iran and Lebanon. Yet Mr Trump
seems intent on ending the war, even though the Iranian regime remains in
place and retains its ability to strike Israel with missiles and drones. It may
even end up keeping its nuclear material, although American officials insist
it will not. Even a political conjurer as talented as Mr Netanyahu will
struggle to transform that into a triumph.
Iran’s rulers, too, are trying to depict the war as a victory. It certainly seems
to have tightened their grip. Factions closed ranks. Soldiers and civil
servants stayed at their posts, defying calls to defect. Emergency crews
cleared rubble. There were fewer blackouts and water cuts than usual.
Despite strikes on banks, salaries were paid.
The focus of popular outrage shifted from the regime’s massacres of
protesters in January to America’s and Israel’s excesses. Early enthusiasm
for foreign intervention waned along with hopes that the Islamic Republic
would collapse and as the bombing spread from military targets to steel
mills, refineries and bridges. Many monarchists lost faith that Reza Pahlavi,
the son of the last shah, would return, and drifted away from Iran
International, the opposition broadcaster that championed the American and
Israeli strikes as a means of restoration. “We woke up to the realisation that
Israel was not on our side,” says a former Iranian supporter of intervention.

=== Page 52 ===
Yet the truce threatens to revive old fissures. Hardliners, known as the
paydaris, have attacked pragmatists, or amalgarayan, led by Mohammad
Baqer Qalibaf, the speaker of parliament, and fellow military veterans, for
negotiating. “Instead of a ceasefire, let’s strangle this rabid dog!” thundered
Kayhan, the paydari mouthpiece, hours after the truce was announced.
Acceptance within the regime that Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme
leader killed in an Israeli air strike on the first day of the war, should be
succeeded by his son, Mojtaba, is also fraying. Some question his fitness,
given that he is widely rumoured to have suffered severe injuries himself.
Others cite his father’s purported opposition to dynastic succession. The
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), the main force that defends the
regime, may quickly lose its wartime unity and fragment again into factions.
Strikes on infrastructure have further weakened an already feeble economy.
Its dire state was one of the causes of mass protests that erupted in
December. Lots of Iranians cannot afford enough to eat. Many others hope
to emigrate.
The destruction of bridges, roads, railways, telecoms networks, airports and,
an industrialist claims, half the passenger-jet fleet may have the effect of
loosening the centre’s grip on the provinces. So too could the destruction of
the security services’ bases around the country. Kurds and other minorities
may become restive.
Indeed, some analysts see Iran’s continued attacks on Gulf countries as a
reflection of a splintering within the regime. With its leaders hidden in
bunkers and the mobile-phone network penetrated by Israeli spies,
communication is difficult. The IRGC has given commanders in the field
latitude to launch attacks on their own initiative. Some may be unaware of
the ceasefire or are choosing to ignore it. On April 8th, after the truce had in
theory gone into effect, Iran fired more than 50 drones and missiles at the
UAE, one of the biggest barrages of the war. It also struck a vital pipeline in
Saudi Arabia that carries 7m barrels a day of oil to the Red Sea, bypassing
Hormuz. In Kuwait it targeted power and water-desalination plants.
Yet there have also been tantalising hints that the regime is becoming less
hardline. The most obvious is its embrace of the ceasefire, however poorly

=== Page 53 ===
observed. What is more, on its first day, the authorities freed a political
prisoner, Maryam Akbari Monfared, after 17 years in prison. State
television, very unusually, has been airing interviews with unveiled women.
Mr Qalibaf and a coterie of pragmatic IRGC generals appear to occupy the
most senior positions within the government. A leadership less wedded to
Mr Khamenei’s anti-colonial diatribes, in turn, may find it easier to repair
relations with the West. Western countries remain the preferred destinations
for study and travel for the children of Mr Qalibaf and other grandees. Even
Mojtaba Khamenei is said to own luxury properties in London.
The new leadership is unlikely to carry out a mass release of political
prisoners, as the opposition demands, much less scrap the religious
foundations of the Islamic Republic. But it may see a strategic and fiscal
value in being acknowledged as the gatekeeper, perhaps even toll-collector,
of the Strait of Hormuz.
Traffic through the strait had been slowly increasing before the ceasefire.
Some 74 vessels transited in the week ending April 5th compared with fewer
than 40 in the first weeks of hostilities, with two-thirds of the ships
concerned leaving the Gulf and a third entering. But that is still a trickle

=== Page 54 ===
compared to the 130 or so that would typically have made the passage every
day before the war began.
Almost all the ships getting through are tied to Iran or “friendly” countries.
In order to monitor these vessels Iran has required them to sail a peculiar
route between Larak Island and the Iranian mainland, not through the main
channel of the strait. The assumption within the industry is that all these
ships have either secured passage through diplomatic leverage (boats tied to
Pakistan seem to be getting through, for example) or have paid off the IRGC
(the going rate is said to be around $2m a tanker).
There are over 700 commercial vessels still stuck in the Gulf that would
happily take advantage of the ceasefire to get moving again. But few of them
are risking a transit for now, given the conflicting signals emerging from
Iran and the shakiness of the ceasefire in general. As Lloyd’s List, a trade
publication, notes, recent transits have been negotiated individually with the
Iranian authorities, and have involved the submission of documents on
ownership, management, financing, insurance and trading and chartering
history to show that a vessel has no American or Israeli connections. Iran’s
foreign minister insists that safe passage “will be possible via co-ordination
with Iran’s armed forces and with due consideration of technical
limitations”, two conditions that did not apply before the conflict. To top it
all off, Iran has implied that the route around Larak island is necessary
because it has laid mines in the main shipping lanes.
Most shipowners are waiting to see what happens, according to Clarksons, a
shipbroker. It thinks “transit levels still seem unlikely to return to pre-
conflict levels in the near term”. Even if the majority of stranded ships are
soon allowed to leave the Gulf, the process will be slow, as the strait’s
shipping lanes cannot safely accommodate very many at once—especially if
the narrow and shallow route around Larak is the only option.
The two-week duration of the ceasefire (if it lasts even that long) presents
another problem. Shipowners will not be in a hurry to send vessels into the
Gulf, even if it appears safe to do so, if there is a risk that fighting might
flare again, trapping them on the wrong side of the strait. And the
dislocations of recent weeks will create further delays. Some tankers that
had been bound for the Gulf were rerouted to the Atlantic after the strait

=== Page 55 ===
closed to try to pick up cargo there. It will take several weeks to return them
to their customary routes, even in the unlikely event that the strait reopens
completely.
For the petro-monarchies of the Gulf, the strait is either their primary
maritime link to global markets or their only one: they send out
hydrocarbons and other commodities, and import everything from cereals to
cars. Iran’s ability to shut the strait poses an existential threat; its apparent
desire to charge tolls on vessels using Hormuz smacks of extortion.
Iran may not be able to implement such a scheme in peacetime, especially if
Oman, on the other side of the strait, does not co-operate. A couple of ships
have managed to exit the Gulf in recent days while sailing close to Oman’s
shores. Yet officials across the Gulf are naturally pondering longer-term
alternatives to the strait.
Saudi Arabia and the UAE have been able to maintain a portion of their oil
exports despite the strait’s closure using pipelines that connect in the Saudi
case to Yanbu, a port on the Red Sea, and in the UAE’s case to Fujairah, a
port on the Gulf of Oman. Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait and Qatar, in contrast, have
no alternatives to the strait.
The Iraqi government and leaders of the autonomous Kurdish region in
northern Iraq have hastily agreed to re-open the Kirkuk-Ceyhan pipeline,
which can carry a modest 250,000 barrels a day (b/d), a fraction of the
country’s pre-war exports of about 3.3m b/d. Iraq is also shifting some oil by
road through Syria—a costly and inefficient method.
After governments in the region have rebuilt production capacity damaged
in the war, says Alan Gelder of Wood Mackenzie, an energy consultancy,
their next priority will be to expand the capacity of existing pipelines. Then,
perhaps, they may try to build short interconnectors to neighbouring
countries. The most difficult projects are long-distance pipelines that
traverse several countries.
Maisoon Kafafy of the Atlantic Council, a think-tank in Washington, DC,
argues that Gulf states need a regionwide network that is “resilient by
design” with multiple interconnections and ports so that the closure of a

=== Page 56 ===
single chokepoint can no longer disrupt global supply chains on such a scale.
But that will take decades and tens of billions of dollars to build, not to
mention a hitherto elusive degree of diplomatic alignment. And the attack on
the Saudi pipeline shows that alternative export routes are just as vulnerable
to Iranian drones and missiles as oil tankers in the Strait of Hormuz.
That is why a second vulnerability exposed by the war is so worrying to the
countries of the Gulf: their reliance on an ever-less-reliable America. For
decades the presence of American troops on the Arabian peninsula was
meant to deter aggression. Mr Trump’s war has flipped that logic on its head.
Instead of warding off attacks, America’s forces attracted them.
In public, most Gulf officials insist the war will not shake their bond with
America. Their private views are more nuanced. A few express a sort of
buyer’s remorse with Mr Trump, a president they worked hard to court. Less
than a year ago he stood in the Saudi capital and announced an end to
“interventionist” wars in the Middle East. Now he is waging one.
Yet when it comes to the broader relationship with America, Gulf states have
no clear alternative. Britain and France are helping to shoot down drones
above Qatar and the UAE, but their reluctance to commit to a post-war

=== Page 57 ===
maritime mission in the strait has irked some Gulf governments. Europe, in
their eyes, is unwilling and unable to embrace a serious hard-power role.
They have other options, of course. Qatar will deepen its ties with Turkey,
which has deployed troops in the emirate since 2017. Saudi Arabia will firm
up the defence pact it inked with Pakistan in September. South Korea rushed
an air-defence system to the UAE during the war; the two countries have
grown increasingly close. If such middle powers can help them diversify
their relationships, however, they cannot substitute for a superpower.
That points to another lesson of the war. Arab states thought they could stay
out of competition between America and its great-power rivals. When
Russia invaded Ukraine, the Middle East sought to remain neutral; Vladimir
Putin was a welcome guest in the UAE as recently as August. He has not
returned the favour. Russia has reportedly provided Iran with satellite
imagery to help it strike targets in Arab states. Meanwhile, Volodymyr
Zelensky rushed to the Gulf to offer help shooting down drones: the Iranian
Shahed models that have wreaked havoc across the region, after all, are the
same ones Russia is using against Ukraine.
There is frustration in the Gulf towards China as well. It did help nudge Iran
towards accepting Mr Trump’s ceasefire. But a country that imports most of
its oil from the Middle East joined Russia in vetoing a UN Security Council
resolution, sponsored by Bahrain, to authorise a military mission in Hormuz.
At the same time, Russia and China have been underwhelming allies for Iran
as well. The former has provided targeting help but seemingly not much
more. The latter is unlikely to offer much help with post-war reconstruction
if America does not ease sanctions.
A few years ago everyone in the Middle East was keen to talk about the
region’s new multipolar era. Now America is at the centre of events, for
better or worse, and its rivals are on the margins.
Yet one of America’s closest allies is increasingly viewed with suspicion as
well. Outside of the UAE, many Arab officials now regard Israel as a
destabilising force in the region. They believe it dragged Mr Trump into the
war by misleading him about how easy it would be to topple the Iranian

=== Page 58 ===
regime. They also think its ferocious bombing of Lebanon on April 8th was
an effort to blow up the ceasefire.
All of this leaves the Gulf states in a quandary. Before the war the region
had enjoyed decades of relative peace. It thought itself an entrepot immune
from the Middle East’s many conflicts. America would keep it safe, even as
it pursued closer ties with Russia and China; for some, relations with Israel
also offered the promise of a staunch ally against their common foes in Iran.
The war has upended all of those assumptions at once.
For almost half a century, the conflict between America and Iran has defined
the Middle East. It was a fight both were happy to conduct at arm’s length.
They bloodied one another in Iraq, first in the 1980s and again in the 2000s,
but only indirectly. They carved out spheres of influence, and their allies
fought wars in Lebanon, Yemen and the occupied Palestinian territories. A
direct war was unimaginable, though: the consequences seemed too great.
Mr Trump, ever the transgressor, has made the unimaginable real. The
consequences of that will be irreversible, no matter how much the president
thinks he can bend reality to his will. Perhaps the talks in Pakistan will
succeed, in which case America, Israel and the Gulf states may no longer be
bound by a mutual threat. Or perhaps they will fail and the spectre of war
will linger. America will have to decide whether to stick around in a region
it has long tried to leave, or to abandon its allies. Either way, the Middle East
will be dealing with the consequences of Mr Trump’s “little excursion” for
years to come. ■
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//briefing/2026/04/09/americas-war-on-iran-has-changed-
the-middle-east-for-the-worse

=== Page 59 ===
Briefing | Damage report
The war was steadily spiralling in scope and
destruction
America, Israel and Iran were striking a widening array of targets across
an expanding area
April 9th 2026
THE DUST has barely settled in the war on Iran. But data from conflict
monitors, satellites and independent researchers show that the conflict
expanded across a huge area, engulfed a diverse array of targets and affected
a huge number of people.
Since America and Israel started the war on February 28th, Iran has
launched at least 4,784 drones and 1,851 missiles at targets from Cyprus to
Oman, a greater distance than Paris to Moscow. A conflict between Israel
and Hizbullah, a Lebanese militia allied to Iran, has also reignited—an
almost separate western front.
Most of Iran’s munitions have been intercepted—at least 4,513 drones and
1,464 missiles. Most of the bombs aimed at Iran, by contrast, have hit their
targets, and so the damage inflicted on it will be far greater. Information
from inside the country remains scarce. Even so, using data from ACLED
and ISW, two conflict-monitors, we have mapped 3,164 strikes on Iran and a
further 2,692 in the rest of the region.
Satellite radar imagery of Tehran reveals widespread, pinpoint damage, often
matching geo-located strike data. And our tally of strikes is likely a massive
under-count. America claims to have hit at least 11,000 targets in Iran and
Israel 10,000.
Where targets can be surmised, they hint at a steady expansion in the war’s
scope. Early waves of strikes hit military installations and the political
leadership, killing Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader, and other senior

=== Page 60 ===
officials. Later, many strikes appeared to focus on dismantling the regime’s
internal security apparatus.
Recently the intensity of strikes increased, their focus shifting to weapons
manufacturers and infrastructure. A spike in attacks in the days before the
ceasefire was announced included an Israeli blitz on bridges in the north of
the country. That late spike is also corroborated by The Economist’s war-
monitoring system, which uses satellite data on abnormal fires near 208
strategic sites across Iran, such as army bases, to detect probable attacks.
Millions have been exposed to the violence. Roughly 18.5m of Iran’s 93m
people live within a kilometre of a reported strike, as do 8.4m people in
other countries. On the first day of the conflict, a strike near an IRGC naval
base hit a girls’ school, reportedly killing at least 175 people, most of them
students. The overall number of civilians killed in the war remains unknown.
■
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//interactive/briefing/2026/04/08/the-war-was-steadily-
spiralling-in-scope-and-destruction

=== Page 61 ===
United States
Donald Trump’s ceasefire shows how America has changed
An environmentalist, a landowner and a libertarian walk into a barn
Will California’s next governor be a fighter or a fixer?
Meet the four Democratic tribes
As more states legalise gambling, what next for Las Vegas?
That ugly ballroom epitomises the story of Donald Trump’s presidency

=== Page 62 ===
United States | A tale of two Gulf wars
Donald Trump’s ceasefire shows how America has
changed
Contrast it with George Bush senior’s victory in Kuwait
April 9th 2026
If Operation Epic Fury has truly ended, following the announcement of a
two-week ceasefire on April 7th, it will have lasted nearly as long as
Operation Desert Storm, the campaign to expel Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi
forces from Kuwait in 1991. A comparison of the two wars shows how
much America has changed.
Back then, President George H.W. Bush sought approval from Congress and
the UN Security Council before opening fire. This time round, Donald
Trump did not bother with such formalities. Bush, who died in 2018,
patiently persuaded 41 other countries to join America’s military coalition.
Mr Trump started the war with one ally, Israel. He did not consult other

=== Page 63 ===
allies, but then demanded they help when things got hard, and denounced
them as “COWARDS” when they proved reluctant.
The elder Bush laid out a clear, limited objective: reversing one country’s
seizure of another. Mr Trump offered a shifting array of goals, from
destroying Iran’s missiles and nuclear programme to regime change.
Bush, who did not have access to social media, chose his words carefully.
His terse response to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 was “This will not
stand.” Mr Trump has been more verbose and less measured. “Open the
Fuckin’ Strait, you crazy bastards, or you’ll be living in Hell—JUST
WATCH! Praise be to Allah,” he posted on Truth Social on April 5th.
The 41st president declared victory only after he had won, and in his victory
address praised American soldiers and allies—but not himself. Mr Trump
declared victory early and often. “We won. In the first hour it was over,” he
boasted on March 11th. Despite being over in the first hour, it lasted nearly
six more weeks, snuffed out hundreds of lives and made humanity
measurably poorer.
On the morning of April 7th Mr Trump vowed to wipe out Iranian
civilisation if the regime did not meet his terms. For ten and a half hours, the
world wondered how seriously to take this astounding threat. Then he
backed down, citing progress in negotiations. The next day he sounded
cheerful. “This could be the Golden Age of the Middle East!!!” he posted on
Truth Social, adding: “Big money will be made.”
The liberation of Kuwait from the Middle East’s most torture-happy despot
marked a high point of American power—a unipolar moment after the end
of the cold war. It also pushed Bush’s approval rating at home to nearly
90%. Democrats as well as Republicans applauded. Mr Trump’s war has
been less well-received.
His supporters note that several of Iran’s bellicose leaders and much of its
conventional arsenal have been destroyed. “Other presidents marked time
and kicked the can down the road. President Trump made history,” said Pete
Hegseth, the secretary of war. To avoid further battering, Iran has

=== Page 64 ===
provisionally agreed to partially re-open the Strait of Hormuz, allowing vital
oil and gas to flow again. Oil prices fell and stocks rose at the news.
Critics retort that the strait was only closed in the first place because of the
war, and that Iran is now claiming the right to charge ships hefty tolls to pass
through it. The Islamic regime still has its stocks of highly enriched uranium
and a stronger incentive to pursue nuclear weapons. Mr Trump’s ceasefire is
“a major strategic error founded on a false understanding of the Iranian
government”, says Danielle Pletka of the American Enterprise Institute
(AEI), a conservative think-tank.
America’s situation is “far worse” than it would have been, had Mr Trump
never started the war, says Suzanne Maloney of the Brookings Institution, a
non-partisan think-tank. “The Iranian regime is emboldened, the global
economy is damaged, our munitions and interceptors are depleted and our
allies are further alienated.”
The war has strengthened the sense that Mr Trump’s approach to geopolitics
is neither competent nor benign. Again, the comparison with the 41st
president is instructive. As a former director of the CIA, Bush carefully
weighed the intelligence he heard. By contrast, when the current CIA
director dismissed as “farcical” the rosy scenarios for quick and easy regime
change that Israel’s prime minister had presented to Mr Trump, the president
brushed aside the warning, according to the New York Times.
Bush, a decorated navy pilot who once completed a mission while his plane
was on fire, took war seriously. He hoped that victory might help forge “a
world where the United Nations [could] fulfil the historic vision of its
founders” for peace. Mr Trump, who avoided the draft, has pivoted within
hours from musing about war crimes (“we’re going to bring them back to
the Stone Ages, where they belong”) to urging a boycott of Bruce
Springsteen (who he said was “bad, and very boring [and] looks like a dried
up prune”).
MAGA types hail Mr Trump’s over-the-top threats as a brilliant negotiating
tactic. But the negotiations with Iran have far to go. The two sides are still
oceans apart on issues such as Iran’s nuclear stockpile (Mr Hegseth suggests
it should hand it all over to America) and the strait (Mr Trump has suggested

=== Page 65 ===
that America should get a cut of the tolls, because “why shouldn’t we?
We’re the winner”).
Democrats are using the word “unhinged” to describe Mr Trump’s wartime
threats. Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia says they “show an increasing mental
and moral instability”. But this argument may not sway many voters. Their
views on Trumpian diplomacy depend more on partisan allegiance than on
recent events. Even before the war, only 7% of Democrats were satisfied
with America’s standing in the world, compared with 80% of Republicans,
according to Gallup, a pollster.
Despite his triumph in the Gulf, Bush lost his bid for re-election the next
year, thanks to a lacklustre economy. Mr Trump’s next electoral test comes
in November at the midterms, which he has joked about cancelling. Judging
by betting markets, the ceasefire has made little or no difference to his
party’s odds of holding on to the House of Representatives (slender) or the
Senate (50-50).
More will depend on how long it takes for the war’s effect on prices to ebb.
Roger Pielke, also of AEI, estimates that it has been costing a typical
American family $400 a month, by making fuel and fertiliser more
expensive, among other things. Mr Trump has sometimes sounded blasé
about such pocketbook worries. On April 3rd he proposed a budget that
would raise defence spending by a colossal 40% and cut other areas. “It’s
not possible for [the federal government] to take care of day care, Medicaid,
Medicare, all these individual things,” Mr Trump recently told a private
audience, suggesting that the states should do more instead. “We have to
take care of one thing,” he said. “We have to guard the country.” ■
Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter
with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and
Balance, a weekly note that examines the state of American democracy and
the issues that matter to voters.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//united-states/2026/04/09/donald-trumps-ceasefire-shows-
how-america-has-changed

=== Page 66 ===
United States | Pipeline politics
An environmentalist, a landowner and a
libertarian walk into a barn
How a pipeline tangled political alliances in Iowa
April 9th 2026
ASK A FARMER in Iowa about their land and many will delight in sharing
how long it has been in their family. “You don’t understand if you haven’t
grown up on a farm,” says Sherri Webb, whose 40 acres in Shelby County
will next be inherited by a seventh generation. “When you’re raised that
way, to cherish the land and to take care of it, it just sticks with you.” Her
property is farmed for corn and beans by a tenant chosen by her
grandmother.

=== Page 67 ===
Now Ms Webb is caught up in a fight to stop a carbon-capture pipeline from
running through it. The company that wants to build it is Summit Carbon
Solutions, which was founded in Iowa by an agricultural business giant and
Republican mega-donor. The proposed route, more than 2,000 miles long,
would collect and pipe carbon dioxide from ethanol plants through Iowa,
Nebraska, Minnesota and South Dakota, ending in North Dakota for
underground storage (see map). Supporters say the pipeline will create jobs
for construction workers and help ethanol producers sell more fuel to low-
carbon markets, in turn helping corn farmers.
In 2024 Iowa’s utilities commission granted Summit a permit, giving it the
right to use eminent domain—which allows the government to take private
land for public use—to build the pipeline if the route has been approved in
other states. The project qualifies for carbon-capture tax credits, which were
expanded during Joe Biden’s administration. These were extended by
Donald Trump’s One Big Beautiful Bill Act to also include credits for
enhanced oil recovery, a process that involves retrieving oil out of dry wells
using carbon dioxide. Summit has said the project could serve as a “critical
CO2 supply artery” for American oil basins, including North Dakota’s
Bakken field.

=== Page 68 ===
Some landowners and ethanol plants have agreed to the pipeline. But a band
of Republican rebels see it as a land grab. The result is a muddled alliance
against the project between liberal environmentalists, rural landowners and
conservative Republicans. In Iowa supporters of the cause include Steve
King, a controversial former Republican congressman known for making
nativist remarks, and Bobby Kaufmann, the leader of Iowa’s House of
Representatives and a former adviser to Mr Trump’s 2024 campaign in the
state.
“When we’re fighting oil pipelines it’s really hard to get certain members of
the Republican Party on board,” says Emma Schmit of Bold Alliance, an
environmental group that protested against the Dakota Access Pipeline.
Republicans tend to support big oil projects, seeing them as essential to
energy security. But some are less sure of the benefits of a pipe carrying
carbon dioxide. Many landowners say they are worried about safety, often
citing a separate case in Mississippi in which residents were poisoned after a
carbon-capture pipeline ruptured. Summit says there have been no fatalities
from such projects.
“Trump says the whole green thing’s a hoax, I don’t argue with him,” says
Steve Kenkel, the Republican former supervisor of Shelby County, of the tax
credits. He alleges the president has kept them “because these people are in
his pocket pretty deep”. His farm, which has been in his family for more
than 140 years, is a mile outside the impacted route. But he believes that
people should have the right to say no to the project. In protest he recently
stopped selling grain to an ethanol plant that has said it would work with
Summit.
The ruckus could shape the state’s primary elections in June. Last year Kim
Reynolds, the governor, who is not seeking re-election, vetoed a bill aiming
to restrict the use of private land for similar pipelines. Candidates vying to
replace her discuss property rights on the campaign trail.
Missteps on the issue have already cost Republicans elsewhere along the
pipeline’s route. In South Dakota several moderate lawmakers were replaced
by radical newcomers who campaigned on a property-rights platform in
2024. The state has since banned eminent domain for carbon-capture

=== Page 69 ===
pipelines, a potential roadblock to the project. In nearby North Dakota a
judge has revoked Summit’s underground-storage permit for now.
In the meantime landowners of varying political stripes are lobbying
lawmakers to take up an amended bill at Iowa’s state Capitol each week. On
a recent frosty morning dozens showed up in red shirts with slogans
including “We the people of Iowa are pissed off”. One sign asked, “What
topples without eminent domain protections?” Close by, a line of several
large dominoes etched with phrases that included “LIBERTY” and “THE
AMERICAN DREAM” were knocked down. ■
Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter
with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and
Balance, a weekly note that examines the state of American democracy and
the issues that matter to voters.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//united-states/2026/04/09/an-environmentalist-a-
landowner-and-a-libertarian-walk-into-a-barn

=== Page 70 ===
United States | All politics is national
Will California’s next governor be a fighter or a
fixer?
Candidates with buzzy national profiles are leading those with local
records
April 9th 2026
ANTONIO VILLARAIGOSA lost the room with one sentence. The former
mayor of Los Angeles, along with five other candidates who hope to be
California’s next governor, were recently trading barbs on a stage in Fresno.
“You’re never going to get elected,” Mr Villaraigosa told his two Republican
opponents, “because at the end of the day, it is a blue state.” A chorus of
groans and scoffs echoed through the place (conservatives are plentiful in
this part of California). But Mr Villaraigosa’s comment has already proved
prescient.

=== Page 71 ===
In California, the top two finishers in June’s primary will advance to the
general election regardless of party. Gavin Newsom, the state’s current
governor, is term-limited, and the eight leading Democrats jockeying to
replace him have splintered the vote. Party leaders have been panicking (and
journalists have been salivating) over the possibility that two Republicans
could progress. But President Donald Trump, of all people, has put
California’s Democrats out of their misery and made a truth-teller out of Mr
Villaraigosa. On April 5th he endorsed Steve Hilton, a Briton and former
Fox News host who used to advise David Cameron. If Mr Hilton
consolidates Republican support as expected, he will face a Democrat come
November—and he will almost certainly lose.
But which Democrat? Nearly every governor of California since 1942 had
previously won a statewide campaign. The only exceptions to the rule were
Hollywood heroes Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Yet this
pattern seems to be breaking down. The three Democrats polling highest
boast national partisan profiles built around criticising Mr Trump. The
candidates with experience running big cities or working in Sacramento, the
state capital, are languishing. The divide among Democrats in this race is not
really between moderates and progressives, but between fighters and fixers.
First consider the fighters. Tom Steyer is a billionaire hedge-fund founder
and climate activist who ran for president in 2020. He has already spent
more than $112m of his own money on his campaign. Then there is Eric
Swalwell, who has served for more than a decade in the House of
Representatives, where he helped manage Mr Trump’s second impeachment.
His 2020 presidential campaign lasted for three months, making it even
shorter than Mr Steyer’s brief run. He annoys Mr Trump so much that the
FBI may soon release files from an old investigation into his association
with a suspected Chinese spy (Mr Swalwell was not accused of
wrongdoing).
Also among the fighters is Katie Porter, a former congresswoman who tried
and failed to win a Senate seat in 2024. At a second town hall on the same
day in Fresno, most candidates introduced themselves in (sometimes
limited) Spanish to the many Hispanic workers and labour leaders who were
in attendance. Ms Porter abstained from doing so except to call Mr Trump “a
racist pendejo” (idiot).

=== Page 72 ===
Some of California’s power brokers doubt that House members have what it
takes to fix things. “I am of the opinion that congressional people know
nothing about running the state, and I’m right,” says Willie Brown, a former
statehouse speaker and former mayor of San Francisco. But there is a reason
why the focus on Mr Trump resonates. Some Democrats are concerned
about the state’s standing as a counterweight to the Trump administration.
When Rusty Hicks, the chair of California’s Democratic Party, was still
worried about two Republicans advancing to the general election, he said
that the biggest thing at stake in such a scenario “is California’s leadership
on the world stage”.
California has plenty of home-grown problems, however. Recent polling
suggests that roughly half of likely voters think their state is on the wrong
track. Enter, the fixers. “I think most people intuitively understand that we
can’t just blame Donald Trump for all of our problems,” says Matt Mahan,
the mayor of San Jose, California’s third-largest city. “We have to take
ownership of our policy failures.” Mr Villaraigosa, now 73, led the state
assembly before he was mayor of LA, but he has been out of office for more
than a decade. His two runs for governor reveal how politics in California
has changed. In 2018 the state’s kingmakers chose Mr Newsom instead,
recalls Mr Brown. “He was really upset with us.” This time round, the state
party no longer seems able, or willing, to make decisions in smoke-filled
rooms.
About 30% of Democrats say they don’t know who they are voting for.
“People still ask me if I’m running against Gavin Newsom,” says Mr
Mahan, who hopes to win over undecided voters. Part of voters’ malaise
may stem from the governor’s ubiquity. Mr Newsom himself reckons that
his redistricting campaign last year deprived the race of attention. After eight
years, some Californians are ready to move on. In Fresno, Ms Porter
approvingly mentioned Mr Newsom’s expansion of free community college.
Someone in the audience blurted out: “He’s on book tour.”■
Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter
with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and
Balance, a weekly note that examines the state of American democracy and
the issues that matter to voters.

=== Page 73 ===
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//united-states/2026/04/09/will-californias-next-governor-
be-a-fighter-or-a-fixer

=== Page 74 ===
United States | Cards party
Meet the four Democratic tribes
What 19,000 survey respondents reveal about rival factions on the left
April 9th 2026
An unpopular war started by an unpopular president: these ought to be
favourable circumstances for an opposition party. As yet, though, the
Democratic Party has no clear standard-bearer or set of ideas. The primaries
for the 2026 midterms, which began in early March and run until September,
will offer the sharpest signal yet, from millions of voters across every state,
about which faction within the Democratic coalition is ascendant.
To understand how these groups differ, The Economist analysed responses
from the 19,000 Democrats who took part in the Co-operative Election
Study, which is administered by YouGov, during the 2024 elections. The
study puts a plethora of questions on policy, from zoning laws to banning
TikTok, to its patient respondents. Individual voters are idiosyncratic. But
put them together, apply some fancy maths, and four distinct clusters
emerge.
Progressives are the largest bloc of Democratic voters, making up 40% of
the total. They are also the youngest, the most highly educated and the
whitest. They strongly favour redistribution of wealth. Fully 98% agree with
the sentiment that white Americans enjoy “white privilege”. The vast
majority also believe that the government should play a larger role in
addressing inequality. Roughly 70% believe the government should increase
spending on welfare; that is at least 25 points higher than any other faction
in the party. They are also much more likely to support an increase in
government spending on health care and education. The tribe’s most
prominent figures are Bernie Sanders, an independent senator from Vermont
who caucuses with the Democrats, and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a
Democratic-Socialist congresswoman from New York City.

=== Page 75 ===
Establishment Democrats are the second-largest tribe (at 29%) and have the
highest average age. They share many of the progressives’ views on
economics, but are more hesitant when it comes to public safety. Nearly
nine-in-ten say they want more patrols at the border and about three-quarters
of them oppose reductions to police funding. This faction is most strongly
represented by the party’s governing wing. Mark Kelly, a senator from
Arizona, and Gretchen Whitmer, the governor of Michigan, are a close
match.
The Bootstrap Democrats (18% of the total) are the most religious of the
four tribes. Some of their views more closely resemble those of Republicans.
They are least likely to believe in the idea of white privilege, for example
(though 60% do). They are more optimistic on race relations than other
groups: a majority believe that other minorities overcame prejudice to work
their way up in society, so black Americans should follow the same path.
Though a majority support the right to an abortion, the share—68%—is far
lower than in any other faction. However, on taxation and spending on
health care and education, they remain aligned with the rest of the
Democratic Party. Elected examples of the tribe include Henry Cuellar, a
congressman representing a district in south Texas and the only anti-abortion
Democrat in Congress; and Marie Gluesenkamp Perez, a congresswoman
from Washington state and the co-chair of the Blue Dog Coalition, a group
of moderate and conservative Democrats.
The Isolationists are the smallest group (13% of Democratic voters). They
align with progressives on many domestic issues. They stand out on matters
of foreign policy. Around eight in ten think America should not be involved
in the wars in Ukraine (77%) or Gaza (82%). They are overwhelmingly
female, have the highest share of black and Hispanic supporters of any
cluster, and are the least likely to hold a college degree. Their most notable
figures are two outspoken politicians who represent the San Francisco Bay
Area. Barbara Lee, a longtime California congresswoman who became the
mayor of Oakland in 2025, is known for being the only member of congress
to vote against the authorisation for use of military force in the wake of
September 11th. Ro Khanna, of California’s 17th congressional district, has
also argued for a more restrained role abroad.

=== Page 76 ===
The party will not cohere, if it ever does, until the 2028 presidential primary
is over. But this work makes clear that the eventual winner of that contest
cannot afford to alienate the party’s progressive bloc, which has swollen
during the Trump era. ■
Stay on top of American politics with The US in brief, our daily newsletter
with fast analysis of the most important political news, and Checks and
Balance, a weekly note that examines the state of American democracy and
the issues that matter to voters.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//united-states/2026/04/07/meet-the-four-democratic-tribes

=== Page 77 ===
United States | Doubling down
As more states legalise gambling, what next for
Las Vegas?
Visitor numbers are down. But legalisation presents new opportunities
April 9th 2026
Even in the depths of a desert winter, a few hardy punters are enjoying the
morning sun in the rooftop pool of the Circa resort in downtown Las Vegas.
As music blares, a 140-foot screen shows a European football match
alongside real-time betting odds. Two bars, a grill and a poolside casino
keep the punters happy while staff advertise a forthcoming bikini contest.
The Circa’s latest attraction is no mere pool but an “outdoor aqua-theatre”,
boasts Derek Stevens, its owner: “The best in the world, [something] that’s
going to make people get on a plane and come visit.”
Tempting people to come to Las Vegas is getting harder. For decades,
Nevada enjoyed a near-monopoly on gambling. That was broken first by

=== Page 78 ===
Atlantic City in 1978, then the riverboat expansion and tribal casino boom of
the 1990s. Since the Supreme Court ruled in 2018 that a federal ban on
sports betting was unconstitutional, gambling on sport has become near-
ubiquitous. By the end of this year 40 states will have legalised sports
betting and 11 will allow “i-gaming” (online slots and table games). “If you
have the itch to play slots, if the weather’s cold, you can do it from home,”
says Barry Jonas of Truist, a bank which recently downgraded MGM, a Las
Vegas casino giant, from “buy” to “hold”.
The legal betting revolution has coincided with a losing streak on the Las
Vegas Strip. In 2025 visitor numbers dipped to 38.5m, 10% below the city’s
pre-pandemic peak (see chart 1). A strong dollar has helped to deter
overseas visitors. Asian tourism has never fully recovered from the
pandemic. The big recent fall has been among Canadians, Las Vegas’s main
international customers, whose number has dropped by a quarter since
President Donald Trump suggested annexing their country. Las Vegas’s
mayor has implored them to come back: “We love you, we need you and we
miss you.” The Circa is accepting Canadian dollars at parity with the
greenback, a discount of 25%.
Domestic visitors have also ebbed. High-rollers are still coming: posh
resorts like the Wynn and the Venetian are humming. But cheaper resorts

=== Page 79 ===
such as the Excalibur and the pyramid-shaped Luxor feel emptier than usual.
The bankruptcy of Spirit Airlines, a no-frills carrier, has further thinned the
lower-end crowd. Hidden hotel charges—from parking fees to $10 water
bottles and spurious resort fees—have soured the city’s reputation for value.
Yet against the odds, the spread of legal betting is helping the city. First, it
has created more gamblers. Some 17% of Americans bet on a sporting event
last year, more than double the share two years earlier, according to polls by
Ipsos. Half of American men under 50 have an online sports-betting
account. As gambling moves into the mainstream it is attracting millions of
new customers, and thus potential new Vegas visitors. “Eventually you’re
always going to want to come to Mecca,” says Mr Stevens.
Most of the online market has been seized by two digital upstarts,
DraftKings and FanDuel. But Vegas bookmakers such as MGM and
Caesar’s Palace have set up their own betting apps, which they use to suck
customers into their marketing funnel. Gambling online earns loyalty points
or prizes which can be cashed in in Las Vegas, such as a free night at the
Bellagio or a stack of chips to play with. The apps generate reams of data,
allowing resorts to hit customers with deals during weeks when their hotels
have low occupancy.
Expanding legal betting has tended to help Las Vegas in the past, points out
David Schwartz, a historian of gambling. He notes that the city’s casinos
were closing their poker rooms until a boom in online poker in the 2000s
revived interest in the game. Now something similar seems to be happening
with sports betting. Whereas total gambling revenue on the Strip was flat
last year, betting on sport increased by about a quarter.
The bigger shift caused by legal betting’s expansion is the transformation of
Las Vegas into a sporting city. That is symbolised by a construction site on
the corner of the Strip’s busiest intersection, where the Tropicana hotel, a
former Rat Pack hangout, was dynamited in 2024 to make way for a $2bn
baseball stadium. The Athletics, formerly of Oakland, California, are due to
move into the new ballpark in 2028.
For decades Las Vegas was a sporting pariah. Professional leagues, worried
that the “integrity of the game” would be compromised by bookmakers, kept

=== Page 80 ===
their distance. Twenty years ago the National Football League (NFL) even
refused to air a television ad for the city during the Super Bowl. Now, as
legalised betting spreads across America, “The entire country has become
comfortable with gambling on sports,” says Steve Hill of the Las Vegas
Convention and Visitors Authority.
The result is a sports boom in the city. Over the road from the Athletics’
future digs is a gleaming copper-coloured arena, built in 2016, that is home
to the Golden Knights ice-hockey team. Nearby, a colossal American
football stadium, completed in 2020, hosts the Raiders (who, like the
Athletics, moved from Oakland). In 2023 the city added an annual Formula
One Grand Prix to its calendar. A basketball team—plus new arena—is
rumoured to be next. “You really have become Sports Town, USA,”
admitted Roger Goodell, the boss of the NFL, when the Super Bowl came to
Las Vegas in 2024. The city is tipped to host the event again in 2029.
A steady stream of fun-seeking visitors makes Las Vegas a good spot to run
a profitable stadium. “It’s like an airplane. You don’t want to fly an airplane
with empty seats. You don’t want to have a venue with empty nights,” says
Marc Badain, president of the Athletics, who previously oversaw the
Raiders’ move to the city. In between 81 home ballgames per season, the
Athletics’ new stadium is likely to host everything from concerts to rodeos.

