=== LEADERS ===
Leaders
Letters
By Invitation
Briefing
United States
The Americas
Asia
China
Middle East & Africa
Europe
Britain
International
Business
Finance & economics
Science & technology
Culture

Economic & financial indicators
Obituary

优质App推荐
英阅阅读器 - 让您轻松阅读
英语书, 高效查词、句子翻译、背单词、AI学英语、第三方图书源等一
应俱全! 点击下载

Duolingo - 快乐、高效学外
语, 带你玩转听说读写! 点击下载
Notability - 高效、便捷的
PDF笔记App, 随时记录你的想法! 点击下载

The world this week
Politics
Business
The weekly cartoon

The world this week
Politics
April 9th 2026
Donald Trump called a two-week truce in the Iran war. But it was soon on
shaky ground, as Iran continued to threaten shipping in the Strait of Hormuz
and launched more missiles at Gulf states, and at Saudi Arabia’s pipeline
carrying oil from the Gulf to the Red Sea for export. Iran insists that the
ceasefire agreement means Israel must stop its attacks on Hizbullah, Iran’s
proxy in Lebanon. Israel and America contend that it does not. Israel
launched its biggest attack on Lebanon yet, in which over 250 people died.
Mr Trump said US ships and aircraft would remain in the region until Iran
complied with “the real agreement”. Amid all the uncertainty, Pakistan
prepared to host peace talks in Islamabad.
A few days ahead of the ceasefire America launched a huge combat search
and rescue mission to find a crewman from an F-15 fighter jet that was
possibly shot down by an Iranian missile. The airman hid in Iranian

mountains before he was eventually extracted by American forces. Iran had
also launched an operation to find him. A captured American would have
handed the regime a big propaganda victory.
Mr Trump met Mark Rutte, NATO’s secretary-general, at the White House.
The president has questioned the loyalty of NATO countries in the Iran war
and mooted the possibility of leaving the alliance. Mr Rutte said their
discussion had been frank, but that most European countries had provided
support to America, even if some had failed to help.
Pete Hegseth, America’s secretary of war, fired General Randy George as
the army’s chief of staff, amid an increasingly tetchy relationship between
the army’s top brass and the Trump administration. General George had
recently tried to hold a meeting to discuss Mr Hegseth’s decision to block
the promotion of some army officers, according to reports.
Mr Trump promoted Todd Blanche to acting attorney-general after sacking
Pam Bondi from the job. The president reportedly wasn’t happy that Ms
Bondi hadn’t launched more prosecutions against his enemies and thought
she had mishandled the release of the Epstein files. Mr Blanche, who was
Ms Bondi’s deputy, is a lawyer who has defended Mr Trump in his criminal
court cases, including his hush-money trial.
Cuba released the first batch of more than 2,000 prisoners it has promised to
set free in what the communist government described as a “humanitarian”
gesture. It was the biggest such amnesty in ten years. America said it was
monitoring the situation to see if any political prisoners would be among
those released.
Venezuela has released hundreds of political prisoners since January amid
pressure from the Trump administration. In another easing of tensions
between the two countries, the United States lifted sanctions on Delcy
Rodríguez, who became Venezuela’s interim president when Nicolás
Maduro was snatched by American forces. The White House praised Ms
Rodríguez for “doing a great job”.
Kanye West was banned from entering Britain amid a furore over his past
antisemitic remarks and praise of Hitler. Known as Ye, the rap artist was

supposed to headline a festival in London in July, but corporate sponsors,
such as Pepsi, pulled out when his comments resurfaced in the media. The
festival has been cancelled.
Britain’s Labour government announced an adjustment to the complicated
and controversial system of student loans. But it is not the permanent change
that disgruntled graduates wanted. From September, when rates for the next
academic year are set, a cap of 6% interest will be fixed for 2026-27. The
loans are currently subject to an increase of retail price inflation plus 3%
each year. The government says the change “will protect students and
graduates…from the potential of inflation” due to the conflict in the Middle
East.
J.D. Vance, America’s vice-president, visited Hungary to show his support
for Viktor Orban, the prime minister. Mr Orban, who shares the same
worldview as Mr Vance and Mr Trump, is facing a tough re-election battle
on April 12th; his populist-right Fidesz party has consistently trailed Tisza,
its centrist rival, in the polls. Deflecting accusations that America was
meddling in Hungarian politics, Mr Vance criticised the EU for interfering in
Hungary’s relations with Russia, suggesting it was a “foreign influence”.

Hungary’s tense relationship with Ukraine has featured in the election.
Following the discovery of explosives near a pipeline in Serbia that carries
Russian gas to Hungary, Mr Orban called an emergency security meeting.
Russia suggested Ukraine had planted the devices, which Ukraine denied.
Mr Orban’s opponents questioned the timing of the discovery of the
explosives, and subsequent scaremongering, so close to the election.
Ukraine’s parliament began voting on a series of tax reforms that are tied to
funding from the IMF, though there is stiff opposition to some of the
changes. Meanwhile, Ukraine said Russia killed eight people in attacks on
the south-east of the country, and had targeted buses. The Russians blamed a
Ukrainian drone for killing three people in the Vladimir region, east of
Moscow.
Police killed one gunman and injured two others outside the Israeli consulate
in Istanbul. There were no Israeli diplomats inside. They left Turkey for
their own safety soon after Hamas’s terrorist attack on Israel in October
2023.
Vietnam’s parliament unanimously elected To Lam, the Communist Party’s
leader, as president and head of state, making him the most powerful leader
in the country in decades. To Lam rose to prominence by overseeing a
crackdown on government corruption. He plans soon to visit Xi Jinping in
China. Le Minh Hung, a former governor of Vietnam’s central bank, was
selected as prime minister.
In Myanmar the parliament also rubber-stamped the concentration of power
in the country’s leader by elevating Min Aung Hlaing to the position of
president. As an army general, Min Aung Hlaing led the military coup that
ousted the civilian government in 2021. China congratulated him on his
“election”.
On a rare visit to China by a senior Taiwanese politician, Cheng Li-wun,
who leads the opposition Kuomintang (KMT), visited the tomb of Sun Yat-
sen, the party’s founder, in Nanjing. The city was the centre of the Republic
of China’s government before it fled to Taiwan in 1949, after being defeated
by the communists in China’s civil war. Ms Cheng promised to “promote
reconciliation and unity”. Back home the KMT is stalling an increase in

defence spending that the government has asked for as China steps up its
military drills in the seas around Taiwan.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/politics

The world this week
Business
April 9th 2026
NASA’s Artemis II mission revived some of the optimism about space travel
that greeted the Apollo flights in the 1960s and 1970s. The crew of three
men and one woman in the spacecraft they named Integrity travelled
406,771 km (252,756 miles) from Earth, farther than the previous record for
manned space travel set by the Apollo 13 mission in 1970. As they looped
around the far side of the Moon they viewed regions on the lunar surface no
human had ever seen before, as well as a rare in-space solar eclipse.
SpaceX provided more details of its forthcoming IPO at a meeting with
bankers, according to reports, and suggested that a large portion of the
shares it offers will be made available to retail investors rather than
institutions. Elon Musk’s rocket company could seek to raise as much as
$75bn upon its stockmarket debut in June, which would make it by far the
biggest listing ever.

Oil prices remained volatile after the announcement of a ceasefire in the Iran
conflict; Brent crude fell from about $110 a barrel to a little over $90, but
then rose again. Saudi Aramco, meanwhile, increased the premium it
charges to customers in Asia for its main oil grade to $19.50 a barrel, which
comes on top of the Oman-Dubai benchmark price. It is a record jump in the
premium for Asia, but less than markets had expected.
ExxonMobil warned that its first-quarter profit will take a hit from the Iran
war, but mostly because of the accounting procedure it had used to hedge
prices. This was a “timing effect”, the company explained, and would result
in a profit once the transactions covered by the hedging were finalised. The
surge in oil and gas prices would have a positive impact on its earnings, it
said. Exxon estimated that its global oil and gas production would be 6%
lower in the quarter than in the previous three months, in large part because
of Iran’s attacks on its gas assets in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
American employers created 178,000 jobs in March, the most since
December 2024. The rebound came after 133,000 jobs were shed in
February. Health care and construction accounted for most of the new
workers, but federal-government employment continued to decline by a
further 18,000 positions. The number of federal jobs has dropped by
355,000, or 11.8%, since reaching a peak in October 2024.
Pershing Square Capital, an investment-management company run by Bill
Ackman, announced a complex plan to take control of Universal Music by
combining it with an investment vehicle in America. If successful the deal
would see Universal’s share listing move from Amsterdam to New York, but
Mr Ackman will need to secure the agreement of two-thirds of the music
company’s stockholders, as well as the blessing of Vincent Bolloré, who is
its largest shareholder.
Commerzbank revealed that it had held talks with UniCredit about a
takeover recently, but that the negotiations were fruitless. Commerzbank has
been fending off hostile overtures from its Italian rival for 18 months, ever
since UniCredit started amassing a stake in the German lender, which now
stands at 29%. Last month UniCredit made its €35bn ($41bn) takeover offer
formal.

Campbell Wilson announced that he would step down as chief executive of
Air India, 18 months before his scheduled departure. Mr Wilson was tasked
with turning the airline around when it was bought by Tata Group from the
government in 2022, but it has struggled with losses. It is also subject to
more regulatory scrutiny after one of its planes crashed in Ahmedabad last
June, killing 260 people. IndiGo, Air India’s main rival, recently appointed
Willie Walsh, a former CEO of British Airways, as its new boss.
Foxconn reported a 30% increase in revenue for the first quarter, year on
year. The contract manufacturer, which assembles many of the world’s
devices, experienced strong growth for cloud and networking products
because of “robust” demand for AI racks for data centres. The launch of the
new iPhone helped contribute to “significant” growth in its consumer-
electronics division.
OpenAI published an “Industrial Policy for the Intelligence Age”. Subtitled
“Ideas to Keep People First”, the document outlined the firm’s vision around
three broad topics, of distributing AI-driven prosperity more evenly, creating
safeguards to reduce systemic risks, and ensuring widespread access to AI so
that economic opportunity isn’t concentrated among the tech class. It also
recognises that as “AI reshapes work and production”, governments may
come to rely less on labour income and payroll taxes, and more on capital
gains and corporate taxation.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/business

The world this week
The weekly cartoon
April 9th 2026
Dig deeper into the subjects of this week’s cartoon:
European allies are losing hope of keeping America in NATODonald
Trump’s ceasefire shows how America has changedRecriminations over Iran
have heightened the risk of a break-up of NATO
The editorial cartoon appears weekly in The Economist. You can see last
week’s here.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/the-weekly-cartoon

Leaders
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s economic harm
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk of a break-up of
NATO
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for legalising assisted dying

Leaders | Our cover
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
There is a reason he wants an exit from Iran
April 9th 2026
NOT ALL wars have a winner. But every war has at least one loser and if—
a big if—the ceasefire marks the end of the war in Iran, the biggest loser will
be Donald Trump. The conflict has set back his chief war aims and revealed
the shallowness of his vision for a new way of wielding American power.
The peace is desperately fragile. America and Iran cannot agree on whether
it covers Lebanon, being attacked so hard by Israel that the threat to the
broader ceasefire seems intentional. They dispute how Iran should open the
Strait of Hormuz, an American precondition for talks. And their negotiating
positions are so far apart that they cannot agree even on what plan they are
to discuss in Islamabad at the weekend.

The best reason to think Mr Trump will not return to war is that he now
grasps he should never have started it. His abhorrent chest-beating posts
threatening to destroy Iran look like attempts to dress his climbdown in
Kevlar. He knows that renewed war would panic the markets and that having
hailed a “Golden Age” in the Middle East, the player of four-dimensional
chess would risk looking a fool.
Iran, too, has reasons to hold back. Its leaders keep being killed. Though
they care little about their citizens, including the thousands who have died in
the war, the wholesale destruction of power and transport networks would
make the country harder to govern. They also want sanctions lifted. The
regime will also fancy that time favours it at the negotiating table. America
cannot permanently keep its troops poised to attack. If war breaks out again
it will be because Iran overplays its hand.
The most likely outcome is therefore a wounded Iranian regime clinging to
power and holding out for maximal goals in talks. Iran has no navy or air
force; it has lost and used up many of its missiles and drones. To make more
of them, it will have to contend with the fact that its economy has been set
back years by over 21,000 American and Israeli strikes.
Mr Trump is calling that a great victory. It doesn’t look like one alongside
his scant progress in fulfilling the war’s three most persuasive aims: to make
the Middle East safer and more prosperous by taming Iran; to topple the
regime; and to stop Iran becoming a nuclear power once and for all.
The war has harmed regional security. Before it began, Israel had partially
dismantled Iran’s network of proxy militias. Yet Iran has now established a
new source of leverage, by attacking Gulf countries and blocking shipping
through the Strait of Hormuz. Iran is seeking to charge a toll for use of the
strait. Mr Trump has even mused about splitting the revenues. The Gulf
states and their customers can probably manage to resist such an affront to
freedom of navigation. But a tussle lies ahead.
Even after oil producers have built new pipelines to avoid the Gulf—the
work of several years—Iran will be able to strike critical infrastructure. The
Gulf countries, which market themselves as oases of calm, must ask whether

they can depend on America. Or should they rethink their security by doing
more themselves or even finding an accommodation with Iran?
The regime remains, despite Mr Trump’s feeble claim to have brought it
down. He may be hoping that Iranians soon rise up against their oppressors
so that he can claim the credit. That is possible, but it looks less likely now
than before the war, when the regime was more unpopular than at any time
in its 47-year history. With Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ailing, it faced a
perilous transition to a new generation. The war has brought about that
transition, anointing Ali’s son, Mojtaba. Unlike Ali, he is a figurehead.
Control lies with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and its rivalrous
factions—all of them belligerent nationalists.
And the war may have aggravated the nuclear threat. America and Israel did
further damage to Iran’s infrastructure, but 400kg or so of highly enriched
uranium—enough to make ten bombs—is still buried at nuclear sites. Mr
Trump is insisting that Iran surrender this “nuclear dust”. Iran wants
sanctions relief, but the incentive to deter future attacks by using it to make a
bomb has increased, potentially leading to regional nuclear proliferation.
That would be a dire outcome, but to stop it Mr Trump and future presidents
may have to strike every few years. On the evidence of this war, that will be
hard to sustain.
Where does this leave the architects of this conflict? Never has Israel
wielded such military power as it does today. But the war showed the limits
to what this can achieve and how its appetite for pre-emptive attack is
leading to fear and loathing in the region. For many Israelis, to fight as
America’s equal stirred great national pride. Yet even as Israel has earned
the praise of Republican politicians, 60% of Americans now look
unfavourably on it, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. That
leaves Israel weaker.
America under Mr Trump has even more to reflect on. The country used to
derive its power by marrying military strength with moral authority. But
when this president threatens to wipe out the Iranian civilisation—a
genocide by any other name—he treats morality as if it were a source of
weakness.

Some in the Trump administration behave as if America is tied down by
things like international law and the Geneva conventions. Liberated from
those constraints it will be more powerful. The war has shown that “might is
right” is not just a desecration of decades of foreign policy, but a fallacy.
Although America’s military superiority was on full display in Iran—
integrating artificial intelligence into operations, rescuing downed pilots,
achieving supremacy at low cost—it also revealed deep problems.
The war has shown that the value of America’s might is easy to
overestimate. Its factories cannot resupply its armed forces fast enough,
whereas Iran fought an asymmetric war with limited weapons. Too much
testosterone leads to wretched judgments that confuse lethality with
winning. Overwhelming firepower without a strategy saps American
strength.
Iran has a wicked regime, but a just war depends on a sober judgment that
violence is a necessary last resort. Instead Mr Trump treated Iran as a vanity
project, in which America’s strength absolved him of the responsibility for
thinking through the consequences of choosing to attack. Might alone is not
right. Sometimes it fails even to bring victory. ■
For subscribers only: to see how we design each week’s cover, sign up to our
weekly Cover Story newsletter.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/donald-trump-is-the-wars-biggest-
loser

Leaders | The hangover
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s
economic harm
Even if the Strait of Hormuz reopens, expect lasting change to energy
markets
April 9th 2026
THROUGHOUT THE war in Iran most investors have bet that an economic
catastrophe would not take place. Oil and gas prices would need to rise to
the stratosphere to destroy demand for the fuel that flows through the Strait
of Hormuz. That would cause recession and high inflation. So commodities
prices rose to painful, rather than disastrous, levels. The planned reopening
of the strait seems to have justified the optimism. As we published this,
stocks and bonds alike had rallied. The S&P 500 index of stocks sat only
about 3% beneath its all-time high, reached in late January.

If the ceasefire fails the rally would be reversed and then some, because
investors would have to price in a war that is resistant to peacemaking. If it
holds, recession will be avoided, but commodities markets will still feel the
effects of the war for months to come. Gulf countries have cut their output of
crude by 10m barrels per day, or 10% of global supply. It will take time to
restart infrastructure and get it going full pelt, and to move tankers to the
right places. Insuring cargoes could be pricey, and Iran may try to impose
new tolls, creating uncertainty even if it fails. There is likely to be a lasting
risk premium in oil prices, reflecting the chance of renewed fighting.
This lasting disruption explains why, if futures prices are to be believed, the
price of a barrel of Brent crude will end the year at around $75, about a
quarter higher than was expected at the start of 2026. Similar hangovers will
be felt in other commodities markets. Gas infrastructure is even harder to get
going than oil wells. Qatar’s Ras Laffan export facility lost 17% of its
capacity in a drone attack and will take years to repair. A shortage of
fertiliser, for which the Gulf is also a crucial supplier, has already disrupted
the planting season in the northern hemisphere and parts of Africa. That will
reduce the supply of food and worsen global hunger. Supply chains for
petrochemicals, helium and aluminium will also take time to recover.

The combined economic effect will be to dent global growth and to raise
inflation materially. Central banks will keep interest rates modestly higher
than they might have been; returns for investors will be lower. Businesses
will worry even more about the security of supply chains. They have faced
one shock after another, including covid-19, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and American tariffs. Nobody can now deny the necessity of hedging against
political risk, pandemics and wars. But the need to consider such factors
deters investment and acts as a creeping tax on global economic activity.
All of which sits uneasily with buoyant financial markets. True, the
resilience of the “Teflon economy” shows the adaptive power of markets in
the face of disruption—and the discipline that the threat of catastrophe
exerts on the likes of Donald Trump. Yet disasters cannot always be dodged
and the list of tail risks is long. It includes a Chinese invasion of Taiwan and
an artificial-intelligence crisis.
With energy, there is at least a silver lining to a supply-chain rethink. It
never made sense for global prosperity to depend so much on a single
waterway in the Gulf. Slowing climate change requires burning less fossil
fuel. The need to diversify away from the Middle East will encourage more
renewables capacity and a hunt for new sources of natural gas. The fracking
revolution of the 2010s, from which America has benefited hugely, is an
example of adaptation. The technology had its roots in the 1970s oil shocks,
which also encouraged investment in nuclear power in France and the
exploitation of North Sea oil by Britain and Norway.
The advantages of having a secure and plentiful energy supply are once
again being made plain. The best case for the world is that the economy will
dodge a 1970s-style slump—while policymakers learn 1970s-style lessons.
■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/a-ceasefire-will-not-prevent-the-
iran-wars-economic-harm

Leaders | The transatlantic divorce
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk
of a break-up of NATO
Europe must prepare to defend itself
April 9th 2026
RELATIONSHIPS RARELY collapse overnight; they curdle. Bit by bit,
resentments mount. Trust ebbs. Things are said that are hard to forget. Each
partner builds a story in which the other is the problem. That is how war in
Iran has pushed NATO closer than ever to a point of no return.
To President Donald Trump, America’s European allies put themselves in
the wrong at the start of the war by being slow—and in some cases simply
refusing—to allow American forces to use their own airbases, or to fly
through allied airspace, for strikes on Iran. “You’ll have to start learning how
to fight for yourself, the USA won’t be there to help you anymore, just like
you weren’t there for us,” posted Mr Trump on March 31st.

Europe, naturally, has its own version of events. Many of its governments,
rightly, saw the Iran campaign as rash and dangerously vague. They were
reflecting the views of their voters, who fear being entangled in a war on
which they were not consulted and of which they disapprove. Even so,
countries like Germany and (after a bit of dithering) Britain did allow
America use of its bases and their airspace.
Mr Trump has abused his allies before. Denmark, the most loyal of NATO
members, has been threatened with the seizure of Greenland; European
governments are accused of democratic backsliding. Tariffs have added to
the pain. Being loyal gets you nowhere. But the recriminations over Iran are
more rancorous than ever. That is partly because Mr Trump genuinely feels
let down, but Europeans suspect that it may also be because he wants
scapegoats for the war’s disappointments.
Is this a relationship that can be fixed? Atlanticists still hope so; Mark Rutte,
secretary-general of NATO, visited Mr Trump in Washington on April 8th
hoping to persuade him that to stay in NATO is in America’s own interests.
He didn’t appear to have much success, so even the most committed
Atlanticists must now plan for the worst.
The terrible truth is that, threatening Europe, national security should no
longer be based on the assumption America will be “there to help”. NATO’s
Article 5, which defines an attack on one as an attack on all, is not dead. But
its deterrent effect, based adversaries’ belief that the allies will stick
together, is weaker than at any point in the alliance’s 77-year history,
including crises such as Vietnam and the war in Iraq. Nor can Europe
comfort itself that Mr Trump’s irritation will blow over. Marco Rubio, his
secretary of state, marked a new low by also questioning the value of
membership. And the next president could well agree.
One reason is that Mr Trump is right to say NATO’s European members do
not spend enough on their own defence. For decades they have relied on
America while contributing less than promised. The 2014 target that
committed NATO members to spend 2% of GDP on defence was largely
ignored until Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022. Under Trumpian pressure,
governments talk of 4% or even 5%. But the gap between promise and

reality remains vast. Among the big European countries, only Germany and
Poland are due to meet this goal.
If the transatlantic marriage dissolves, Europeans will have to be ready to
defend themselves. As the prospect of divorce looms larger, the timeline for
self-sufficiency tightens. Europe must now ensure sustained defence
spending at levels closer to those higher targets. New capabilities must be
built, especially in air defence, logistics and munitions, where Europe relies
on America. Forces and arms manufacturing need to be integrated, not
duplicated inefficiently.
Ukraine should be central to Europe’s new security architecture. After four
years of holding off Vladimir Putin, it now fields the continent’s largest and
most battle-hardened army by far (after Russia’s), with deep experience in
high-intensity warfare and the manufacture and use of drones. Rather than
viewing Ukraine solely as a recipient of aid, Europe should aim to integrate
its armed forces into joint planning, procurement and command structures.
They should prepare to make Ukraine part of what may become a Europe-
only version of NATO. Its accession to the European Union should be
accelerated, too. Sadly, all this is a distant prospect.
A reconciliation between Europe and America may still be possible. But the
past six weeks gives scant ground for hope. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/recriminations-over-iran-have-
heightened-the-risk-of-a-break-up-of-nato

Leaders | All downhill from here
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
But rekindled Space Age enthusiasm will need new foundations if it is to
endure
April 9th 2026
On christmas day 1968, a boy called Michael Collins junior asked his father
who was driving Apollo 8, then bringing home the first three men to have
orbited the Moon. Collins senior, who oversaw communications with the
spacecraft, passed his son’s question on to Bill Anders, one of the crew.
There was a pause. Then Anders replied: “I think Isaac Newton is doing
most of the driving right now.” From when it had left lunar orbit until its
planned splashdown on December 27th, the spacecraft’s path was almost
entirely set, like that of a falling rock, by the law of universal gravitation.
Sir Isaac does a lot of this sort of work for spacecraft. After the fiery leap of
lift-off they spend most of their time coasting. Integrity, the capsule that

houses the crew of NASA’s Artemis II mission, has used its main engine
only twice, once to change its orbit around Earth, once to leave it. The crew
of Apollo 8 depended on a burst from their main engine to get into lunar
orbit without hitting the surface (“Longest four minutes I ever spent,” said
Jim Lovell, the pilot). Integrity’s crew just cruised on by, their elegant
figure-of-eight trajectory taking them past the Moon and farther from Earth
than any previous astronauts before beginning the long fall back.
This is not to say the four astronauts—three American, one Canadian—have
not been busy, particularly during their passage over the parts of the Moon
that cannot be seen from Earth. To terrestrial Moon-watchers Mare Orientale
is a hard-to-spot smudge right at the edge of the Moon. To the astronauts
passing almost directly above it, it was a dark bullseye set among concentric
mountain ranges, ripples of rock left by the shock unleashed when a sizeable
asteroid smacked into the Moon less than 4bn years ago. The “targeting
plan” put together to guide the astronauts’ observations helpfully notes that
its diameter is roughly the distance between Johnson Space Centre in
Houston, Texas, where they trained, and Kennedy Space Centre in Florida,
from which they blasted off.
Other features to which the plan drew the crew’s attention, such as Pierazzo,
a far-side crater about 9km across, have previously been appreciated only by
cognoscenti. It was named after Elisabetta Pierazzo, who specialised in the
study of impact craters; remote measurements of its fresh and intriguing
features have been pored over by her colleagues and successors. It seems
unlikely that the astronauts’ brief inspection will have added much. “It’s a
spectacular crater and it’s nice to remember Betty,” says a scientist. “But I
don’t expect any new science results from Artemis II.”
Remembrance also informed the most moving of the observations, those of a
fresh and previously unrecorded crater on the edge of the Moon’s far side.
The crew is recommending it be officially named Carroll, after Carroll
Taylor Wiseman, the late wife of the mission commander, Reid Wiseman.
How tears behave in the absence of gravity is not thought to be part of the
crew’s research agenda, but the message by which they told the world of
their choice made it clear they had found out.

That the mission has produced more by way of emotion than by way of
science—or, thinking of Lovell’s four minutes, jeopardy—is not a criticism.
Integrity’s flight along a path very like that taken by the uncrewed Artemis I
capsule in 2022 was never likely to provide scientific surprises, and any
major technical ones would have been very unwelcome. And so the crew’s
experience has come to the fore. Even if, at times, their expressions of awe,
humility and cosmic connection have felt a touch too scripted, they have
made possible not new discovery, but rediscovery: a reminder to millions
back on Earth that such things can still move them and inspire them.
No picture of Earth and the Moon today can supersede Anders’s picture of
“Earthrise”; it has had half a century to become an icon. But the importance
of “Earthrise” has never been just what the camera saw. It was the presence
of somebody behind the camera, someone in a position to see such a thing.
For most people alive today there has never been such a presence. The
feelings Artemis II evokes by restoring it are no less real to those people for
having been felt before.
Unless re-entry sees Integrity fail tragically to live up to its name, this
emotional affirmation will endure for some time. The role that Elon Musk
and SpaceX are meant to play in the next Artemis mission may sour the
vibes—many idealists stirred by images of Earth as a common home revile
the politics of division he fosters. But Artemis IV’s promise of a lunar
landing soon thereafter should restore the mood.
What, though, of the steady stream of missions planned for after that—those
intended to build and provision a Moon base? They will, by their nature, feel
increasingly routine. The rapture that greeted Apollo 8’s first journey to the
Moon, and later the first landing, was soon eclipsed by Vietnam, oil crises,
Watergate and more. To maintain it, and the support it brings, for a decade or
more this time will require new discoveries, or arguments, or dreams—not
just remixes of those that came before. Spaceships can coast. Space
programmes cannot. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.

This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/07/artemis-ii-has-offered-earth-
inspiration

Leaders | Assisted dying
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for
legalising assisted dying
He should stop dawdling
April 9th 2026
This NEWSpaper believes people should have the right to choose the
manner of their own death. That idea is gaining ground around the world;
some 30 jurisdictions have legalised it to date. Yet in England and Wales the
latest attempt to pass legislation, and the one that has come closest to
succeeding, is now certain to fail. This is a tragedy.
The bill, introduced by Kim Leadbeater, a Labour backbencher, has enough
support to become law. It was passed in the House of Commons in June.
Most Britons, including the prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, have
consistently supported the principle of assisted dying. The bill’s imminent
failure is due to a handful of unelected peers in the House of Lords, who

have made sure it will run out of time by submitting an unreasonable
number of amendments. But the root cause is an absence of leadership by Sir
Keir. In an attempt to avoid making the issue a partisan one, he relegated it
to a private-member’s bill; these are not introduced by government ministers
and are a weak legislative instrument. This was a misjudgment which he
must now put right.
Delays in Parliament might be more understandable if Britain were a
newcomer to this debate. But it is not. The Lords first formally debated an
assisted-dying bill in 1936, years before any other country. An effort to
legalise it has been made almost every decade since the 1960s; Ms
Leadbeater is the fifth parliamentarian to propose a bill of this kind since
2003. Yet whereas healthy debates in other countries led to legislation,
British politicians continue to dawdle.
Opponents of the Leadbeater bill raised concerns that are now well-worn:
the risk of coercion; whether the poor state of palliative care and the health
service deny people a proper choice; and the fear that the bill would be a
“slippery slope” to broader eligibility. These worries do not stand up to
scrutiny.
Coercion? The bill restricts access to assisted dying to people who have at
most six months to live and who have made sustained requests to two
doctors. The idea that an evil relative might use this process to kill someone
who will soon be dead is far-fetched. It would be good if palliative care
improved, and it would be wise to invest in it while legalising assisted
dying, as happened in New Zealand. But inadequate care is not a reason to
oblige those who truly wish to die, and who meet all the criteria, to suffer in
the meantime. Least convincing of all is the slippery-slope objection. It
implies that Britain’s Parliament could carelessly allow a more liberal
regime to emerge. If the past century shows anything it is that Parliament
will do nothing of the sort.
The most compelling argument against this bill is that it is too narrow. As
extra layers of scrutiny have been added, eligibility criteria have arguably
become tighter than in any such bill passed elsewhere. The risk is not that it
would be too easy to get an assisted death but that vanishingly few people
would qualify.

Still, a narrow bill is better than none; and more delay would be intolerable.
Rather than let another backbencher champion it, Sir Keir should offer his
wholehearted support and ensure it gets enough parliamentary time. To do
that, the government should itself introduce the same bill later this year and
let MPs vote according to their conscience. This is the path David Cameron
took in 2013 with a bill to legalise same-sex marriage; it is the one Sir Keir
should take now. Alas, this is unlikely: putting the weight of the government
behind assisted dying would upset some in Sir Keir’s own party and cabinet.
But if he cannot take the heat over one of the issues he strongly believes in,
what is the point of being in the kitchen?■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/sir-keir-starmer-is-britains-best-
hope-for-legalising-assisted-dying



=== BRIEFING ===
Briefing
United States
The Americas
Asia
China
Middle East & Africa
Europe
Britain
International
Business
Finance & economics
Science & technology
Culture

Economic & financial indicators
Obituary

优质App推荐
英阅阅读器 - 让您轻松阅读
英语书, 高效查词、句子翻译、背单词、AI学英语、第三方图书源等一
应俱全! 点击下载

Duolingo - 快乐、高效学外
语, 带你玩转听说读写! 点击下载
Notability - 高效、便捷的
PDF笔记App, 随时记录你的想法! 点击下载

The world this week
Politics
Business
The weekly cartoon

The world this week
Politics
April 9th 2026
Donald Trump called a two-week truce in the Iran war. But it was soon on
shaky ground, as Iran continued to threaten shipping in the Strait of Hormuz
and launched more missiles at Gulf states, and at Saudi Arabia’s pipeline
carrying oil from the Gulf to the Red Sea for export. Iran insists that the
ceasefire agreement means Israel must stop its attacks on Hizbullah, Iran’s
proxy in Lebanon. Israel and America contend that it does not. Israel
launched its biggest attack on Lebanon yet, in which over 250 people died.
Mr Trump said US ships and aircraft would remain in the region until Iran
complied with “the real agreement”. Amid all the uncertainty, Pakistan
prepared to host peace talks in Islamabad.
A few days ahead of the ceasefire America launched a huge combat search
and rescue mission to find a crewman from an F-15 fighter jet that was
possibly shot down by an Iranian missile. The airman hid in Iranian

mountains before he was eventually extracted by American forces. Iran had
also launched an operation to find him. A captured American would have
handed the regime a big propaganda victory.
Mr Trump met Mark Rutte, NATO’s secretary-general, at the White House.
The president has questioned the loyalty of NATO countries in the Iran war
and mooted the possibility of leaving the alliance. Mr Rutte said their
discussion had been frank, but that most European countries had provided
support to America, even if some had failed to help.
Pete Hegseth, America’s secretary of war, fired General Randy George as
the army’s chief of staff, amid an increasingly tetchy relationship between
the army’s top brass and the Trump administration. General George had
recently tried to hold a meeting to discuss Mr Hegseth’s decision to block
the promotion of some army officers, according to reports.
Mr Trump promoted Todd Blanche to acting attorney-general after sacking
Pam Bondi from the job. The president reportedly wasn’t happy that Ms
Bondi hadn’t launched more prosecutions against his enemies and thought
she had mishandled the release of the Epstein files. Mr Blanche, who was
Ms Bondi’s deputy, is a lawyer who has defended Mr Trump in his criminal
court cases, including his hush-money trial.
Cuba released the first batch of more than 2,000 prisoners it has promised to
set free in what the communist government described as a “humanitarian”
gesture. It was the biggest such amnesty in ten years. America said it was
monitoring the situation to see if any political prisoners would be among
those released.
Venezuela has released hundreds of political prisoners since January amid
pressure from the Trump administration. In another easing of tensions
between the two countries, the 