=== Page 15 ===
The world this week
The weekly cartoon
April 9th 2026
Dig deeper into the subjects of this week’s cartoon:
European allies are losing hope of keeping America in NATODonald
Trump’s ceasefire shows how America has changedRecriminations over Iran
have heightened the risk of a break-up of NATO
The editorial cartoon appears weekly in The Economist. You can see last
week’s here.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//the-world-this-week/2026/04/09/the-weekly-cartoon

=== Page 16 ===
Leaders
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s economic harm
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk of a break-up of
NATO
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for legalising assisted dying

=== Page 17 ===
Leaders | Our cover
Donald Trump is the war’s biggest loser
There is a reason he wants an exit from Iran
April 9th 2026
NOT ALL wars have a winner. But every war has at least one loser and if—
a big if—the ceasefire marks the end of the war in Iran, the biggest loser will
be Donald Trump. The conflict has set back his chief war aims and revealed
the shallowness of his vision for a new way of wielding American power.
The peace is desperately fragile. America and Iran cannot agree on whether
it covers Lebanon, being attacked so hard by Israel that the threat to the
broader ceasefire seems intentional. They dispute how Iran should open the
Strait of Hormuz, an American precondition for talks. And their negotiating
positions are so far apart that they cannot agree even on what plan they are
to discuss in Islamabad at the weekend.

=== Page 18 ===
The best reason to think Mr Trump will not return to war is that he now
grasps he should never have started it. His abhorrent chest-beating posts
threatening to destroy Iran look like attempts to dress his climbdown in
Kevlar. He knows that renewed war would panic the markets and that having
hailed a “Golden Age” in the Middle East, the player of four-dimensional
chess would risk looking a fool.
Iran, too, has reasons to hold back. Its leaders keep being killed. Though
they care little about their citizens, including the thousands who have died in
the war, the wholesale destruction of power and transport networks would
make the country harder to govern. They also want sanctions lifted. The
regime will also fancy that time favours it at the negotiating table. America
cannot permanently keep its troops poised to attack. If war breaks out again
it will be because Iran overplays its hand.
The most likely outcome is therefore a wounded Iranian regime clinging to
power and holding out for maximal goals in talks. Iran has no navy or air
force; it has lost and used up many of its missiles and drones. To make more
of them, it will have to contend with the fact that its economy has been set
back years by over 21,000 American and Israeli strikes.
Mr Trump is calling that a great victory. It doesn’t look like one alongside
his scant progress in fulfilling the war’s three most persuasive aims: to make
the Middle East safer and more prosperous by taming Iran; to topple the
regime; and to stop Iran becoming a nuclear power once and for all.
The war has harmed regional security. Before it began, Israel had partially
dismantled Iran’s network of proxy militias. Yet Iran has now established a
new source of leverage, by attacking Gulf countries and blocking shipping
through the Strait of Hormuz. Iran is seeking to charge a toll for use of the
strait. Mr Trump has even mused about splitting the revenues. The Gulf
states and their customers can probably manage to resist such an affront to
freedom of navigation. But a tussle lies ahead.
Even after oil producers have built new pipelines to avoid the Gulf—the
work of several years—Iran will be able to strike critical infrastructure. The
Gulf countries, which market themselves as oases of calm, must ask whether

=== Page 19 ===
they can depend on America. Or should they rethink their security by doing
more themselves or even finding an accommodation with Iran?
The regime remains, despite Mr Trump’s feeble claim to have brought it
down. He may be hoping that Iranians soon rise up against their oppressors
so that he can claim the credit. That is possible, but it looks less likely now
than before the war, when the regime was more unpopular than at any time
in its 47-year history. With Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ailing, it faced a
perilous transition to a new generation. The war has brought about that
transition, anointing Ali’s son, Mojtaba. Unlike Ali, he is a figurehead.
Control lies with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and its rivalrous
factions—all of them belligerent nationalists.
And the war may have aggravated the nuclear threat. America and Israel did
further damage to Iran’s infrastructure, but 400kg or so of highly enriched
uranium—enough to make ten bombs—is still buried at nuclear sites. Mr
Trump is insisting that Iran surrender this “nuclear dust”. Iran wants
sanctions relief, but the incentive to deter future attacks by using it to make a
bomb has increased, potentially leading to regional nuclear proliferation.
That would be a dire outcome, but to stop it Mr Trump and future presidents
may have to strike every few years. On the evidence of this war, that will be
hard to sustain.
Where does this leave the architects of this conflict? Never has Israel
wielded such military power as it does today. But the war showed the limits
to what this can achieve and how its appetite for pre-emptive attack is
leading to fear and loathing in the region. For many Israelis, to fight as
America’s equal stirred great national pride. Yet even as Israel has earned
the praise of Republican politicians, 60% of Americans now look
unfavourably on it, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. That
leaves Israel weaker.
America under Mr Trump has even more to reflect on. The country used to
derive its power by marrying military strength with moral authority. But
when this president threatens to wipe out the Iranian civilisation—a
genocide by any other name—he treats morality as if it were a source of
weakness.

=== Page 20 ===
Some in the Trump administration behave as if America is tied down by
things like international law and the Geneva conventions. Liberated from
those constraints it will be more powerful. The war has shown that “might is
right” is not just a desecration of decades of foreign policy, but a fallacy.
Although America’s military superiority was on full display in Iran—
integrating artificial intelligence into operations, rescuing downed pilots,
achieving supremacy at low cost—it also revealed deep problems.
The war has shown that the value of America’s might is easy to
overestimate. Its factories cannot resupply its armed forces fast enough,
whereas Iran fought an asymmetric war with limited weapons. Too much
testosterone leads to wretched judgments that confuse lethality with
winning. Overwhelming firepower without a strategy saps American
strength.
Iran has a wicked regime, but a just war depends on a sober judgment that
violence is a necessary last resort. Instead Mr Trump treated Iran as a vanity
project, in which America’s strength absolved him of the responsibility for
thinking through the consequences of choosing to attack. Might alone is not
right. Sometimes it fails even to bring victory. ■
For subscribers only: to see how we design each week’s cover, sign up to our
weekly Cover Story newsletter.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/donald-trump-is-the-wars-biggest-
loser

=== Page 21 ===
Leaders | The hangover
A ceasefire will not prevent the Iran war’s
economic harm
Even if the Strait of Hormuz reopens, expect lasting change to energy
markets
April 9th 2026
THROUGHOUT THE war in Iran most investors have bet that an economic
catastrophe would not take place. Oil and gas prices would need to rise to
the stratosphere to destroy demand for the fuel that flows through the Strait
of Hormuz. That would cause recession and high inflation. So commodities
prices rose to painful, rather than disastrous, levels. The planned reopening
of the strait seems to have justified the optimism. As we published this,
stocks and bonds alike had rallied. The S&P 500 index of stocks sat only
about 3% beneath its all-time high, reached in late January.

=== Page 22 ===
If the ceasefire fails the rally would be reversed and then some, because
investors would have to price in a war that is resistant to peacemaking. If it
holds, recession will be avoided, but commodities markets will still feel the
effects of the war for months to come. Gulf countries have cut their output of
crude by 10m barrels per day, or 10% of global supply. It will take time to
restart infrastructure and get it going full pelt, and to move tankers to the
right places. Insuring cargoes could be pricey, and Iran may try to impose
new tolls, creating uncertainty even if it fails. There is likely to be a lasting
risk premium in oil prices, reflecting the chance of renewed fighting.
This lasting disruption explains why, if futures prices are to be believed, the
price of a barrel of Brent crude will end the year at around $75, about a
quarter higher than was expected at the start of 2026. Similar hangovers will
be felt in other commodities markets. Gas infrastructure is even harder to get
going than oil wells. Qatar’s Ras Laffan export facility lost 17% of its
capacity in a drone attack and will take years to repair. A shortage of
fertiliser, for which the Gulf is also a crucial supplier, has already disrupted
the planting season in the northern hemisphere and parts of Africa. That will
reduce the supply of food and worsen global hunger. Supply chains for
petrochemicals, helium and aluminium will also take time to recover.

=== Page 23 ===
The combined economic effect will be to dent global growth and to raise
inflation materially. Central banks will keep interest rates modestly higher
than they might have been; returns for investors will be lower. Businesses
will worry even more about the security of supply chains. They have faced
one shock after another, including covid-19, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and American tariffs. Nobody can now deny the necessity of hedging against
political risk, pandemics and wars. But the need to consider such factors
deters investment and acts as a creeping tax on global economic activity.
All of which sits uneasily with buoyant financial markets. True, the
resilience of the “Teflon economy” shows the adaptive power of markets in
the face of disruption—and the discipline that the threat of catastrophe
exerts on the likes of Donald Trump. Yet disasters cannot always be dodged
and the list of tail risks is long. It includes a Chinese invasion of Taiwan and
an artificial-intelligence crisis.
With energy, there is at least a silver lining to a supply-chain rethink. It
never made sense for global prosperity to depend so much on a single
waterway in the Gulf. Slowing climate change requires burning less fossil
fuel. The need to diversify away from the Middle East will encourage more
renewables capacity and a hunt for new sources of natural gas. The fracking
revolution of the 2010s, from which America has benefited hugely, is an
example of adaptation. The technology had its roots in the 1970s oil shocks,
which also encouraged investment in nuclear power in France and the
exploitation of North Sea oil by Britain and Norway.
The advantages of having a secure and plentiful energy supply are once
again being made plain. The best case for the world is that the economy will
dodge a 1970s-style slump—while policymakers learn 1970s-style lessons.
■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/a-ceasefire-will-not-prevent-the-
iran-wars-economic-harm

=== Page 24 ===
Leaders | The transatlantic divorce
Recriminations over Iran have heightened the risk
of a break-up of NATO
Europe must prepare to defend itself
April 9th 2026
RELATIONSHIPS RARELY collapse overnight; they curdle. Bit by bit,
resentments mount. Trust ebbs. Things are said that are hard to forget. Each
partner builds a story in which the other is the problem. That is how war in
Iran has pushed NATO closer than ever to a point of no return.
To President Donald Trump, America’s European allies put themselves in
the wrong at the start of the war by being slow—and in some cases simply
refusing—to allow American forces to use their own airbases, or to fly
through allied airspace, for strikes on Iran. “You’ll have to start learning how
to fight for yourself, the USA won’t be there to help you anymore, just like
you weren’t there for us,” posted Mr Trump on March 31st.

=== Page 25 ===
Europe, naturally, has its own version of events. Many of its governments,
rightly, saw the Iran campaign as rash and dangerously vague. They were
reflecting the views of their voters, who fear being entangled in a war on
which they were not consulted and of which they disapprove. Even so,
countries like Germany and (after a bit of dithering) Britain did allow
America use of its bases and their airspace.
Mr Trump has abused his allies before. Denmark, the most loyal of NATO
members, has been threatened with the seizure of Greenland; European
governments are accused of democratic backsliding. Tariffs have added to
the pain. Being loyal gets you nowhere. But the recriminations over Iran are
more rancorous than ever. That is partly because Mr Trump genuinely feels
let down, but Europeans suspect that it may also be because he wants
scapegoats for the war’s disappointments.
Is this a relationship that can be fixed? Atlanticists still hope so; Mark Rutte,
secretary-general of NATO, visited Mr Trump in Washington on April 8th
hoping to persuade him that to stay in NATO is in America’s own interests.
He didn’t appear to have much success, so even the most committed
Atlanticists must now plan for the worst.
The terrible truth is that, threatening Europe, national security should no
longer be based on the assumption America will be “there to help”. NATO’s
Article 5, which defines an attack on one as an attack on all, is not dead. But
its deterrent effect, based adversaries’ belief that the allies will stick
together, is weaker than at any point in the alliance’s 77-year history,
including crises such as Vietnam and the war in Iraq. Nor can Europe
comfort itself that Mr Trump’s irritation will blow over. Marco Rubio, his
secretary of state, marked a new low by also questioning the value of
membership. And the next president could well agree.
One reason is that Mr Trump is right to say NATO’s European members do
not spend enough on their own defence. For decades they have relied on
America while contributing less than promised. The 2014 target that
committed NATO members to spend 2% of GDP on defence was largely
ignored until Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022. Under Trumpian pressure,
governments talk of 4% or even 5%. But the gap between promise and

=== Page 26 ===
reality remains vast. Among the big European countries, only Germany and
Poland are due to meet this goal.
If the transatlantic marriage dissolves, Europeans will have to be ready to
defend themselves. As the prospect of divorce looms larger, the timeline for
self-sufficiency tightens. Europe must now ensure sustained defence
spending at levels closer to those higher targets. New capabilities must be
built, especially in air defence, logistics and munitions, where Europe relies
on America. Forces and arms manufacturing need to be integrated, not
duplicated inefficiently.
Ukraine should be central to Europe’s new security architecture. After four
years of holding off Vladimir Putin, it now fields the continent’s largest and
most battle-hardened army by far (after Russia’s), with deep experience in
high-intensity warfare and the manufacture and use of drones. Rather than
viewing Ukraine solely as a recipient of aid, Europe should aim to integrate
its armed forces into joint planning, procurement and command structures.
They should prepare to make Ukraine part of what may become a Europe-
only version of NATO. Its accession to the European Union should be
accelerated, too. Sadly, all this is a distant prospect.
A reconciliation between Europe and America may still be possible. But the
past six weeks gives scant ground for hope. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/recriminations-over-iran-have-
heightened-the-risk-of-a-break-up-of-nato

=== Page 27 ===
Leaders | All downhill from here
Artemis II has offered Earth inspiration
But rekindled Space Age enthusiasm will need new foundations if it is to
endure
April 9th 2026
On christmas day 1968, a boy called Michael Collins junior asked his father
who was driving Apollo 8, then bringing home the first three men to have
orbited the Moon. Collins senior, who oversaw communications with the
spacecraft, passed his son’s question on to Bill Anders, one of the crew.
There was a pause. Then Anders replied: “I think Isaac Newton is doing
most of the driving right now.” From when it had left lunar orbit until its
planned splashdown on December 27th, the spacecraft’s path was almost
entirely set, like that of a falling rock, by the law of universal gravitation.
Sir Isaac does a lot of this sort of work for spacecraft. After the fiery leap of
lift-off they spend most of their time coasting. Integrity, the capsule that

=== Page 28 ===
houses the crew of NASA’s Artemis II mission, has used its main engine
only twice, once to change its orbit around Earth, once to leave it. The crew
of Apollo 8 depended on a burst from their main engine to get into lunar
orbit without hitting the surface (“Longest four minutes I ever spent,” said
Jim Lovell, the pilot). Integrity’s crew just cruised on by, their elegant
figure-of-eight trajectory taking them past the Moon and farther from Earth
than any previous astronauts before beginning the long fall back.
This is not to say the four astronauts—three American, one Canadian—have
not been busy, particularly during their passage over the parts of the Moon
that cannot be seen from Earth. To terrestrial Moon-watchers Mare Orientale
is a hard-to-spot smudge right at the edge of the Moon. To the astronauts
passing almost directly above it, it was a dark bullseye set among concentric
mountain ranges, ripples of rock left by the shock unleashed when a sizeable
asteroid smacked into the Moon less than 4bn years ago. The “targeting
plan” put together to guide the astronauts’ observations helpfully notes that
its diameter is roughly the distance between Johnson Space Centre in
Houston, Texas, where they trained, and Kennedy Space Centre in Florida,
from which they blasted off.
Other features to which the plan drew the crew’s attention, such as Pierazzo,
a far-side crater about 9km across, have previously been appreciated only by
cognoscenti. It was named after Elisabetta Pierazzo, who specialised in the
study of impact craters; remote measurements of its fresh and intriguing
features have been pored over by her colleagues and successors. It seems
unlikely that the astronauts’ brief inspection will have added much. “It’s a
spectacular crater and it’s nice to remember Betty,” says a scientist. “But I
don’t expect any new science results from Artemis II.”
Remembrance also informed the most moving of the observations, those of a
fresh and previously unrecorded crater on the edge of the Moon’s far side.
The crew is recommending it be officially named Carroll, after Carroll
Taylor Wiseman, the late wife of the mission commander, Reid Wiseman.
How tears behave in the absence of gravity is not thought to be part of the
crew’s research agenda, but the message by which they told the world of
their choice made it clear they had found out.

=== Page 29 ===
That the mission has produced more by way of emotion than by way of
science—or, thinking of Lovell’s four minutes, jeopardy—is not a criticism.
Integrity’s flight along a path very like that taken by the uncrewed Artemis I
capsule in 2022 was never likely to provide scientific surprises, and any
major technical ones would have been very unwelcome. And so the crew’s
experience has come to the fore. Even if, at times, their expressions of awe,
humility and cosmic connection have felt a touch too scripted, they have
made possible not new discovery, but rediscovery: a reminder to millions
back on Earth that such things can still move them and inspire them.
No picture of Earth and the Moon today can supersede Anders’s picture of
“Earthrise”; it has had half a century to become an icon. But the importance
of “Earthrise” has never been just what the camera saw. It was the presence
of somebody behind the camera, someone in a position to see such a thing.
For most people alive today there has never been such a presence. The
feelings Artemis II evokes by restoring it are no less real to those people for
having been felt before.
Unless re-entry sees Integrity fail tragically to live up to its name, this
emotional affirmation will endure for some time. The role that Elon Musk
and SpaceX are meant to play in the next Artemis mission may sour the
vibes—many idealists stirred by images of Earth as a common home revile
the politics of division he fosters. But Artemis IV’s promise of a lunar
landing soon thereafter should restore the mood.
What, though, of the steady stream of missions planned for after that—those
intended to build and provision a Moon base? They will, by their nature, feel
increasingly routine. The rapture that greeted Apollo 8’s first journey to the
Moon, and later the first landing, was soon eclipsed by Vietnam, oil crises,
Watergate and more. To maintain it, and the support it brings, for a decade or
more this time will require new discoveries, or arguments, or dreams—not
just remixes of those that came before. Spaceships can coast. Space
programmes cannot. ■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.

=== Page 30 ===
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/07/artemis-ii-has-offered-earth-
inspiration

=== Page 31 ===
Leaders | Assisted dying
Sir Keir Starmer is Britain’s best hope for
legalising assisted dying
He should stop dawdling
April 9th 2026
This NEWSpaper believes people should have the right to choose the
manner of their own death. That idea is gaining ground around the world;
some 30 jurisdictions have legalised it to date. Yet in England and Wales the
latest attempt to pass legislation, and the one that has come closest to
succeeding, is now certain to fail. This is a tragedy.
The bill, introduced by Kim Leadbeater, a Labour backbencher, has enough
support to become law. It was passed in the House of Commons in June.
Most Britons, including the prime minister, Sir Keir Starmer, have
consistently supported the principle of assisted dying. The bill’s imminent
failure is due to a handful of unelected peers in the House of Lords, who

=== Page 32 ===
have made sure it will run out of time by submitting an unreasonable
number of amendments. But the root cause is an absence of leadership by Sir
Keir. In an attempt to avoid making the issue a partisan one, he relegated it
to a private-member’s bill; these are not introduced by government ministers
and are a weak legislative instrument. This was a misjudgment which he
must now put right.
Delays in Parliament might be more understandable if Britain were a
newcomer to this debate. But it is not. The Lords first formally debated an
assisted-dying bill in 1936, years before any other country. An effort to
legalise it has been made almost every decade since the 1960s; Ms
Leadbeater is the fifth parliamentarian to propose a bill of this kind since
2003. Yet whereas healthy debates in other countries led to legislation,
British politicians continue to dawdle.
Opponents of the Leadbeater bill raised concerns that are now well-worn:
the risk of coercion; whether the poor state of palliative care and the health
service deny people a proper choice; and the fear that the bill would be a
“slippery slope” to broader eligibility. These worries do not stand up to
scrutiny.
Coercion? The bill restricts access to assisted dying to people who have at
most six months to live and who have made sustained requests to two
doctors. The idea that an evil relative might use this process to kill someone
who will soon be dead is far-fetched. It would be good if palliative care
improved, and it would be wise to invest in it while legalising assisted
dying, as happened in New Zealand. But inadequate care is not a reason to
oblige those who truly wish to die, and who meet all the criteria, to suffer in
the meantime. Least convincing of all is the slippery-slope objection. It
implies that Britain’s Parliament could carelessly allow a more liberal
regime to emerge. If the past century shows anything it is that Parliament
will do nothing of the sort.
The most compelling argument against this bill is that it is too narrow. As
extra layers of scrutiny have been added, eligibility criteria have arguably
become tighter than in any such bill passed elsewhere. The risk is not that it
would be too easy to get an assisted death but that vanishingly few people
would qualify.

=== Page 33 ===
Still, a narrow bill is better than none; and more delay would be intolerable.
Rather than let another backbencher champion it, Sir Keir should offer his
wholehearted support and ensure it gets enough parliamentary time. To do
that, the government should itself introduce the same bill later this year and
let MPs vote according to their conscience. This is the path David Cameron
took in 2013 with a bill to legalise same-sex marriage; it is the one Sir Keir
should take now. Alas, this is unlikely: putting the weight of the government
behind assisted dying would upset some in Sir Keir’s own party and cabinet.
But if he cannot take the heat over one of the issues he strongly believes in,
what is the point of being in the kitchen?■
Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which
brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader
correspondence.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//leaders/2026/04/09/sir-keir-starmer-is-britains-best-
hope-for-legalising-assisted-dying

=== Page 34 ===
Letters
Is Mexico’s economy broken?

=== Page 35 ===
Letters | A selection of correspondence
Is Mexico’s economy broken?
Also this week, costs of the Iran war, sex workers, types of tourists,
boredom at work, fizzy water
April 9th 2026
Letters are welcome via email to letters@economist.comFind out
more about how we process your letter
You were right to focus on weak growth and entrenched informality in the
labour market as factors behind “Mexico’s broken economy” (“Becalmed”,
March 28th). These remain central constraints on the economy and help
explain the country’s underperformance over time.
Concurrently, over roughly the past decade Mexico has combined falling
poverty with rising real wages and a noticeable reduction in informal labour.
The minimum wage is part of that story. During successive governments

=== Page 36 ===
under the Morena party the minimum wage has risen sharply, now sitting
high relative to the median wage. That has lifted incomes at the bottom and
appears to have influenced pay even beyond the formal sector.
Here the narrative is less clear. You noted that a higher minimum wage could
put a brake on formal labour. But these trends have evolved. Rather than
rising, informality has edged down, suggesting a more complex set of
dynamics at work. Several forces are moving at once. Changes in labour
regulation, some tightening of enforcement and the expansion of social
programmes may all have shifted incentives at the margin. None of these on
their own explains the outcome. Taken together, they begin to.
The question is how far this can go. With the minimum wage now elevated
by OECD standards, the space for further increases without side-effects is
probably narrower.
Will WisemanPractice manager for social policy, Latin AmericaWorld
BankWashington, DC
You hit on a fundamental truth that the current administration in Mexico
seems to overlook: the power of incentives. The government’s approach is
like trying to squeeze more juice out of the same handful of lemons rather
than planting more trees. By constantly raising mandated salaries and
increasing the burden on existing taxpayers, they are inadvertently making
“formality” a luxury many cannot afford.
In simple terms, we have created a system where it is expensive to follow
the rules and free to ignore them. For a small business owner or an
entrepreneur, the maths is devastatingly simple. Why would someone choose
to become “formal”—paying taxes, social security and meeting high-wage
mandates—when they can stay “informal” and keep that overhead as profit?
When the cost of being legal rises, the incentive to stay in the shadows
grows.
If the government truly wants to unleash the private sector, the policy should
not be about extraction, but attraction. We must make it cheaper and easier
to be formal than it is to be informal.

=== Page 37 ===
PABLO EMILIO MUÑOZ Ciudad Juárez, Mexico
The Mexican government’s formal response to the article can be found at
www.economist.com/mexicoletter
“After shock” (March 14th) catalogued the constraints facing America, the
world’s most powerful oil consumer, as it tried to cool the oil price amid the
Iran conflict. Permit me to describe the view from a rather different position.
Mauritius imports all of its fuel. It holds no strategic petroleum reserve. It
has no pipeline alternatives, no bilateral waiver from Washington, and no
seat at the International Energy Agency. Since the closure of the Strait of
Hormuz in early March, pump prices have risen sharply and freight costs on
Indian Ocean routes have roughly tripled. The government has no
meaningful policy lever beyond absorbing the shock or passing it to
consumers who can least afford it.
The energy-security debate triggered by the war has been framed almost
entirely around the options available to major importers, diversification,
reserve releases and accelerated renewables build-out. These are legitimate
responses for economies with the institutional capacity and fiscal space to
pursue them. For small island states, they describe a future that is
structurally inaccessible in the near term.
Energy security is increasingly determined by the ability to pay for it. The
war has made that asymmetry visible. It has not made it a policy priority.
Dr Zaheer AllamVacoas-Phoenix, Mauritius
I have been managing a high-volume brothel in Europe since 2016, and I am
also a researcher focusing on sex work as a form of labour. I read your
column on the economics of the industry with interest (Free Exchange,
March 21st). One point that stood out in the article is how difficult sex work
is to study. What is often missing in research is how this looks from the
other side. Sex workers are used to valuing their time highly. When a
researcher approaches them, often without real experience in the industry,
and asks detailed questions about income it creates a barrier. Income is very
private information, especially when a large part of it is in cash.

=== Page 38 ===
Because of this, a lot of research focuses on the most accessible groups,
which are often at the lower end of the income range. A large group of
higher-earning workers is mostly missing from the data, because they are
difficult to reach and have little reason to take part.
The economic framing of much of the research is also too narrow. Sex work
is not always just money for sex. It can also involve housing, services,
goods, or access to opportunities. This makes the economic reality more
complex than it may seem. You only touched on legal frameworks and new
technologies, but these areas have their own dynamics that shape how the
market works.
Catherine De NoireAmsterdam
Your taxonomy of modern travellers (“Wanderlust and lost”, March 21st)
has a distinguished precursor. Around 1860 Hippolyte Taine, a French
historian and philosopher, divided tourists into six types. These were: people
obsessed by the number of miles they covered; devotees of the details given
in guidebooks; group travellers wary of foreign food; gastronomic pilgrims
with the sole purpose of eating; antique hunters; and those who “see the
Pyrenees” from a hotel chair. Were he writing today, Taine might have added

=== Page 39 ===
a seventh type: the algorithmic tourist, dutifully shepherded by apps into the
same “hidden gems” as everyone else.
Astonishingly, the species has changed little. Travellers then mostly had to
endure bad inns and worse roads. As your article recounted, today’s tourists
must also reckon with visa bans, closed airspace and wars.ZUBIN
AIBARABülach, Switzerland
The real risk of getting rid of grunt work (Bartleby, March 14th) is the loss
of the cognitive “lulls” that drudgery once provided. As Sandi Mann, an
occupational psychologist, has noted, boredom is often the precursor to
divergent thinking. If AI eliminates the natural toil of legacy processes, we
may have to design deliberate periods of low-stimulation downtime into our
workflows. This would ensure that the next generation has the mental space
to be truly innovative, rather than just efficiently supervised.
Peter BalchiusStäfa, Switzerland
In his praise of grunt work, Bartleby argues that we should be wary of an
over reliance on AI to eliminate tedious work. There is, however, an
important difference between work that builds skill and work that simply
drains energy. Some tedious tasks may teach patience or train us in attention
to detail, but much office drudgery consists of unnecessary busywork: fixing
formats, hunting down files and repeating mechanical steps that software
easily handles. In that context, AI is not replacing meaningful labour so
much as removing needless obstacles. The real question is what do we do
with the gains? More output is one answer; fewer working hours may be the
better one.
Isaac ShamieSan Francisco
It is true that mind-numbing tasks can unlock creativity and satisfaction.
This explains why many people in management or professional services
were remarkably happier working from home during the pandemic. Sitting
through endless PowerPoint meetings, where colleagues toss around
concepts to hit personal airtime targets, achieving nothing beyond a vague
sense of “alignment”, is deeply frustrating to the sane mind. Interspersing
these torturous “intellectual” exercises with washing the dishes or making

=== Page 40 ===
the bed offered a necessary respite. These simple chores provided what
modern office life rarely does: an actual problem solved to completion, a
genuine sense of agency, and the mental space for an occasional eureka
moment.
Elmar GansRio de Janeiro
I enjoyed your World In a Dish column on sparkling water (March 21st).
You featured Topo Chico, which is excellent and has the angriest bubbles on
the market. But I find it inexplicable that you neglected to mention Vichy
Catalan. Silky, elegant, a touch of salinity, it is without question the best
sparkling water on earth. I will die on this hill.
Dr Julio FriedmannCarbon DirectLivermore, California
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//letters/2026/04/09/is-mexicos-economy-broken

=== Page 41 ===
By Invitation
A plan for Europe’s tech fightback

=== Page 42 ===
By Invitation | The other special relationship
A plan for Europe’s tech fightback
Britain and the EU can avoid being left in the dust if they work together,
argues Sir Nick Clegg
April 9th 2026
THE RUPTURE in the relationship between America and Europe has
highlighted Britain’s perilous position: out of the EU, yet no longer able to
rely on the “special relationship” to protect its interests. Britain is further
adrift geopolitically than it has been for a century or more. One way or
another, it must re-establish a stronger footing, and exercise greater
leadership, in Europe.
Despite cornering themselves with needlessly rigid commitments not to
reconsider single-market membership and ruling out joining the customs
union, Britain’s prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer have at least
started to make the case for a broader EU rapprochement ahead of a summit

=== Page 43 ===
in Brussels this summer. Yet so far the government has been strangely silent
on one area where greater integration across the English Channel is an
obvious win-win: technology.
Europe has vast market potential, with a nearly-$4trn tech sector—and
considerably more headroom if the EU’s capital-markets union and digital
single market are fully realised. Britain has leading venture-capital (VC) and
startup scenes. It has produced 200 unicorns (private firms worth over
$1bn), funds more startups than Germany and France combined and boasts
the world’s best-funded fintech hub. The opportunity is clear for Europe’s
tech sectors, in and outside the EU, to become the sum of their parts.
As American and Chinese technology becomes more deeply embedded,
there is much talk in Europe’s capitals about the importance of tech
sovereignty. But the truth is no European country, including Britain, is big
enough to stand on its own feet across the full range of AI-related
technologies. The tech supremacy of America and China is in large part a
function of their hemispheric scale. European nations will need to learn to
act at hemispheric scale themselves if they want to compete.
There are signs that Europe’s tech scene is stirring. European VC investment
has quadrupled in a decade, comfortably exceeding China’s. For the first
time, tech workers are just as likely to move from America to Europe as the
other way round.
To capitalise on this opportunity—and emerge stronger from the
transatlantic shock exacerbated by the Iran war—Europe needs to learn to
become a market that can innovate at scale. This should not be confined to
the EU, but a broader “Eurovision” concept of Europe (sans Australia
perhaps). Ukraine is already a world leader in AI defence innovation;
Norway is well placed to lead in low-cost, sustainable data-centre capacity.
Along with Britain, they should be included in an overarching approach to
boost Europe’s performance in bits as much as economic integration in
previous decades focused on atoms.
There are some early steps the EU and Britain can take. Some are modest,
most technocratic. But together they could help spark a continental tech
renaissance.

=== Page 44 ===
First, they should bring together efforts to develop competitive AI
capabilities. The European High-Performance Computing project is about to
fund five AI gigafactories, massive facilities for training and operating
frontier models. British companies should bid in conjunction with peers
from the EU. Britain could also use the upcoming review of the EU-UK
Trade and Co-operation Agreement to negotiate reciprocal access for
researchers and businesses to new supercomputers.
Second, Britain should join the European Investment Fund’s tech-scale-up
fund-of-funds, which provides late-stage growth capital. This would increase
the finance and expertise available to the most promising companies. British
firms could tap a source which has already helped almost a dozen unicorns.
Third, Britain’s researchers should become full members of Horizon Europe,
the EU’s research-and-innovation programme. Rejoining as “associated”
members in 2024 has already been a boon for them. Full membership would
give them access to the European Innovation Council’s equity fund for
startups.
Fourth, Britain should join the EU in embracing the bloc’s “28th regime”.
Anyone doing business in the EU faces 27 overlapping compliance systems;
under the 28th regime, they could register once then operate freely across
the bloc—much as Delaware incorporation allows in America. British
participation is feasible with commitment from both sides.
Last, it should be made easier for talent to start and grow firms in Europe by
lifting visa restrictions and granting special status for tech entrepreneurs
across greater Europe, including Iceland, Norway and Ukraine as well as
Britain. The ecosystem would be more vibrant if Europe embraced the
proposal from Oliver Coste and Yann Coatanlem, two French entrepreneurs,
to lift labour-market rules for the top 10% of earners, unlocking the febrile
talent-swapping that makes Silicon Valley so dynamic without sacrificing
employment rights for the vast majority of workers in tech.
Britain and the EU can take these steps now. Clearly their effects would be
amplified if Britain were to take the natural—and widely popular—step of
reintegrating more fully into the EU. Tough choices lie ahead for the EU too:
for example, ditching or at least significantly redrafting recent AI legislation

=== Page 45 ===
which, if enacted, would discourage AI firms from training models in
Europe just as the EU is trying to build the infrastructure for them to do so.
Britain’s temporary estrangement from its continental hinterland masks the
true strength of Europe’s position. Together, the EU and Britain enjoy a vast
reserve of ideas, capital and innovation. Europe is no musty backwater: it
has the talent, resources and incentive to lead. It should start to think, and
act, like it. ■
Sir Nick Clegg is a general partner at Hiro Capital. He was Britain’s deputy
prime minister from 2010 to 2015 and vice-president, then president, of
global affairs at Meta from 2018 to 2025.
This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//by-invitation/2026/04/09/a-plan-for-europes-tech-
fightback

=== Page 46 ===
Briefing
America’s war on Iran has changed the Middle East—for the worse
The war was steadily spiralling in scope and destruction

=== Page 47 ===
Briefing | With a whimper
America’s war on Iran has changed the Middle
East—for the worse
This week’s ceasefire leaves the region less secure than when the war
began
April 9th 2026
IT WAS A muddled halt to a muddled war. Donald Trump first threatened to
intensify America’s bombing so much that it would destroy Iran’s “whole
civilisation”. Then, less than two hours before this blitz was supposed to
start, he announced that America, Israel and Iran would suspend hostilities
for two weeks and that Iran would allow commercial shipping to resume
through the Strait of Hormuz. Pakistan’s prime minister, Shahbaz Sharif,
who had helped mediate the ceasefire, declared on social media that it was
“EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY”.

=== Page 48 ===
Yet Israel, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
(UAE) all reported subsequent Iranian drone and missile attacks, the truce
notwithstanding. Iran decried an air strike on an oil refinery. Israel
intensified its bombing of Lebanon, which it said was not included in the
ceasefire. Iran (and Mr Sharif) insisted that it was. Ships in the Gulf received
an alert from Iranian forces, stating that any vessel that tried to transit the
strait without Iran’s permission would be destroyed. America and Iran gave
wildly different accounts of the template for negotiations on a lasting end to
the war, which are supposed to begin in Pakistan on April 11th. Pete
Hegseth, America’s “secretary of war” declared the outcome a “historic and
overwhelming victory”. Iran claimed much the same.
It is too early to know whether the ceasefire will take hold properly, let alone
whether the talks in Pakistan will succeed. That makes it hard to judge
where the war has left the two sides. If the negotiations lead to a deal and
Iran agrees to stop threatening its neighbours in exchange for relief from
American sanctions, both will arguably benefit. If the talks fail and the war
resumes, both will be worse off.
For the moment, at least, it is hard to see any winners. The disruption to the
global economy has been vast and will continue for some time yet. Iran has
suffered severe damage not just to military facilities, but also to civilian and

=== Page 49 ===
commercial infrastructure. The Gulf states have seen revenues lost, energy
facilities damaged and their reputation for safety and stability punctured.
Israel’s popularity in America and beyond has taken another knock. America
has run down its stock of munitions and stretched its armed forces.
Meanwhile, none of the goals that Mr Trump and Israel’s prime minister,
Binyamin Netanyahu, had set for the war appear to have been met. Iran’s
regime has lost much of its military might and many of its senior leaders. Its
acceptance of the ceasefire may be a sign that pragmatists are in the
ascendant. But the Islamic Republic remains in place, retains a stockpile of
enriched uranium and still has the capacity to fire drones and missiles
around the region. Worst of all, it has demonstrated for the first time the
potency of a long-dreaded weapon, its power to close the strait, which
America has no means to counter. The region and the world will be paying a
price for the conflict for years to come.
Israelis overwhelmingly supported the war when it started, seeing Iran as an
existential threat. Now many question whether it was worth it. Despite tens
of thousands of Israeli and American strikes, Iran is still able to launch
dozens of missiles and drones at Israel and the Gulf countries every day.
Israel’s assessment early in the war that it had “neutralised” over three-
quarters of Iran’s missile-launchers looks like an exaggeration. Half is a
more plausible guess; even that includes devices that can be restored to
working order fairly easily.
The survival of the regime and its retention of its enriched uranium are
further disappointments. Worse still for Mr Netanyahu, Mr Trump is about
to start negotiating with Iran’s leaders directly. Israel was aware that talks on
the ceasefire were under way but was not party to them. The Israeli air force
was preparing to send its warplanes to attack Iran’s power grid when Mr
Trump called Mr Netanyahu to tell him to stand them down.
On an immediate tactical and military level Israel can point to considerable
achievements. Iran has lost much of its (admittedly puny) air force and its
navy. Its air-defence network is in ruins. Considerable damage has been
done to its arms industry. Israel did not lose a single warplane during the
thousands of sorties it carried out over Iran. At home, its missile-defence
systems intercepted the vast majority of the more than 600 missiles fired at

=== Page 50 ===
Israel by Iran. Only about 20 Israelis were killed, far fewer than predicted in
most military planning for a war on such a scale.
From Mr Netanyahu’s perspective, the war represented a strategic win in a
critical respect: Israel and America co-operated to an unprecedented degree.
The two countries launched a war together against a shared enemy; their
planners co-ordinated targets; and American and Israeli pilots flew on joint
missions.
Yet the manner in which the ceasefire came about, brokered by Pakistan
between America and Iran, with Israel shut out, made clear the nature of the
relationship: that of superpower and client-state. That may be reinforced in
the weeks to come. Israel will not be part of the negotiations in which
America and Iran try to thrash out some sort of permanent agreement.
Israel’s future security will be at the mercy of Mr Trump’s whims.
Worse still for Mr Netanyahu, he could yet be transformed from partner to
scapegoat. He helped convince Mr Trump to launch the war. On April 7th
the New York Times reported that many senior American officials, including
the vice-president, the secretary of state and the head of the CIA, America’s
spy agency, had expressed reservations about Mr Netanyahu’s plans before
the war began. Such leaks, as the war may be ending, could be a sign that
many in Mr Trump’s administration want to distance themselves from
Israel’s leader. They are acutely aware that Israel has become deeply
unpopular among American voters. A survey conducted in late March by
Pew, a research centre, found that 60% of Americans have an unfavourable
view of Israel, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. Mr Trump
personally still seems closely aligned with the prime minister, but their
partnership could be tested.
In a terse early morning statement, Mr Netanyahu said that Israel “supports
President Trump’s decision to suspend strikes against Iran for two weeks”.
He made a point of emphasising that it was, for Israel, merely a pause in the
hostilities. He also stressed that the ceasefire does not include Lebanon,
where Israel has been fighting Hizbullah, a militia backed by Iran which
began launching missiles at Israel on the third day of the war. Instead of
striking Iran, the Israeli air force attacked around 100 targets in Lebanon on

